
Intro

this is what happened more or less the magical girl Trope of anime hit a fever
pitch in the 1990s with the

international phenomenon of Sailor Moon which typified the style both in homage

and parody these tropes have been recreated by artists ever since and have also
become an entire genre in their own

right whether it's newer magical girls like P maim Madoka Maga the westernized
magical girls like the cast of Shira and

the princesses of power or the genderbent magical boys of cute high Earth
Defense Club the Trope has been a

staple of animation for decades but none to my knowledge have been more
discussed

and dissected than the 1997 series revolutionary girl utena created by

bapas a production group formed by director ikuhara kunihiko saoo hasaa

enokido Yoji and uro yiro so let's dive into into the mesmerizing world of
Kara's creative Journey you see back in

the 9s iohara graced toi animation with his presence during the production of
the Beloved Sailor Moon series he

co-directed the second season Sailor Moon R alongside sat yichi and took the
helm as the sole director for both the

animated film Sailor Moon R the movie and the third season Sailor Moon s but
Yahara grew Restless in the confines of

adapting existing Works longing for some creative control thus after the
conclusion of Sailor Moon s in 1995 he

set forth on a quest to birth an original series in this endeavor he assembled
the illustrious bapas a

Consortium of creative talents from anime and manga you see bapas had quite

the history together hasawa and enokido had previously joined forces with ukara

on Sailor Moon where enokido penned many episodes featuring the iconic Sailor

Uranus and Sailor Neptune Bap Papas had also lent their talents to the esoteric
Neon Genesis Evangelion as for syo she

was a seasoned manga artist who had not yet ventured into the realm of anime now

initially iohara envisioned utena as a mainstream showjoe series hoping to ride
the coales of Sailor Moon's commercial

success in fact they began with a concept titled revolutionary girl utena kiss
featuring a group of valiant female

warriors known as the Neo elanar Eleganza Extravaganza battling the enigmatic
end

of the world but as the creativity flowed they settled on a different path a
romantic action show starring a pretty

girl who wears boys clothes the school setting was a Cornerstone of anime but
other elements like the duels and the

Mysterious Rose rde were yet to enter the plot as bapas commenced their
six-month planning phase after syo's

arrival they delved into the nitty-gritty of the story World building and the
intricate process of translating

syo's visual style into anime in parallel Sao embarked on creating a manga
adaptation of aenna while still

contributing her expertise to the anime's development now a fascinating tidbit
here is that while lutena

inevitably carries Echoes of Princess Knight and the rose of versailes to shjo
manga series known for their

crossdressing sword fighting heroins ikuhara was persistently apprehensive

about being seen merely as a parody of these iconic works sitto on the other
hand was brought in to be Papas

primarily because the team wanted a female perspective to avoid unintentionally
parodying Shojo manga

Shojo manga is manga that's aimed at Young Girls by the way fast forward to 1996
with syo's manga adaptation of

utena underway negotiations for the broadcast of the utena anime were finally
sealed and production began in

Earnest bapas took the Reigns of production with the esteemed JC staff handling
animation duties but here's

where the story takes a Twist iohara vision for utena underwent a profound

transformation once the series commenced production no longer content with
aiming for Mass Market success he decided to

infuse the series with a unique non-commercial identity this shift saw

the incorporation of avangard elements such as theatrical inspired layouts
Shadow plays that offer commentary on

each episode's events and the experimental Coral compositions of Ja Cesar as
production Advanced tensions

simmered within bopus the series veered away from its original commercial
trajectory creating what agoro described

as a tug-of-war between Sao and ukara Sao ardently championed the initial

romantic concept for Anna over ikuhara increasingly esoteric Vision they even
reached a point where they didn't speak

to each other for 3 months straight sao's concern you see was not ideological
but pragmatic she believed

the mainstream shjo audience might not Embrace anything other than a traditional
male female romance iohara

however kept the full extent of his intended same-sex romance between utena and
anthy Under Wraps throughout most of

the production ultimately syto supported the way the series handled the
relationship between the characters

nothing succeeds like success since then revolutionary girl lutena has garnered
A Chorus of Praise both at home in Japan

and across the International stage for all that Sailor Moon takes the Lion Share
of public discussion utena's

influence can be felt in the development of anime to this very day in 1997 the
series won the coveted animation Kobe

award for the best television category and as the years rolled on in 2017 NHK

the network behind utena conducted a national poll to determine the 100 greatest
anime in commemoration of the H

100th an iversary of the medium in which utena placed 19th utena has graced

multiple best of lists with his presence anime Insider hailed it as one of the
top 10 best anime ever writer Mike tulle

in his review declared the series to be the most important anime of the 9s
however with all this hype about

it what is revolutionary girl utena actually about get comfortable

because that's not an easy question to answer and things get [Music]

Part 1

weird revolutionary girl lutena is divided into three sagas the student

council Saga the Black Rose Saga and The climactic akori Saga or the apocalypse

Arc depending upon the release uten atenu is a middle school student and it's
very very important to remember

that she's a middle school student throughout the series and the movie to say
that she struggles to keep up good grades is UN fair to her because she

doesn't really seem to care about that stuff or anything that is in sports or
her friends she is as we would describe

a tomboy and a subject of simultaneous jealousy Fascination and desire from
almost everyone in the school as a child

utena lost both of her parents in an undescribed accident she managed to pull
herself together due to a quote unquote

chance encounter with an individual she described as a prince he gave her a rose

engraved Signet ring with the promise that it would help them meet again in the
future though she admits her memory

on this is a bit foggy she doesn't even quite remember what her prince looked
like probably not what this Prince was

intending utena didn't fall madly in love with him per se though she has lived
out her youth in anticipation of

one day meeting him instead she decides that she will one day also become a

prince like him to save the imperil princesses of the world just as the rose
Prince had once saved her as an audience

you really don't have any idea how important this is until like the last five
episodes maybe even the last two

until then it simply seems to be a backstory that drives utena to enroll in the
prestigious and exclusive otori

Academy there she is the source of Wonder for the girls a source of Envy for all
the boys and a source of

confusion for all the teachers she acts and dresses like a boy and is noted for
her Fierce sense of justice and

dignified nobility spying a shy and reclusive anthy Hima being slapped by her
boyfriend she intervenes on what she

believes is anthy's behalf oh I challenge you to a duel anthy is a piece

in a very complicated game of chess that focuses around this school's enigmatic
student council this befits a beloved

anime Trope of the high school student council holding a position of political
power that can rival a small government anthy has a secret double life as the

rose bride and the student council is so interested in her because the rosebride
is the key to unlocking a power that can

revolutionize the world the one who is engaged to the rosebride can access this
power and bring about Revolution

presumably to suit their own whims the rose bride becomes engaged to whomever
can best her current betroth in a duel

utena wins a duel with the student council vice president to stop him from
hitting anthy so utena becomes anthy's

New Groom to be just works like that and this makes sense compared to everything

that follows it don't worry it gets weirder the key to these duels are the
Signet Rings which at present only

members of the student council wear the student council is not pleased that
they've lost their

ability to shape the world of the future and seek to get anthy back from utena
with the help or perhaps at the whim of

a mysterious benefactor codenamed end of the world the Japanese version is more
clearly translated to apocalypse I'm

told but was not used in English because of the apparent close ties to religious
overtones nomy you like girls more than

boys yes listen nomy God created men and women for a reason reason that reason

being that they join in the best sort of way no matter how good something may
feel going against God's plan what are

you implying Big Brother you know you're the only one that I

love utena threw her close connection and apparent engagement to Ane works at
coaching Ane to think for herself an

unfortunate drawback of the rosebride is that the rosebride can only ever do or
feel the way that she is instructed to

by her betrothed even as her bridegroom utna tirelessly coaches anthy to
advocate for her own needs and her own

feelings and to do what she wants rather than what her magical husband person to
be tells her I'm sure tops of all

genders can identify with both the irony and endless struggle of trying to coax
their bottoms into being less

subservient in the first Arc we see the various reasons that the members of the
student council would want to use the

power of Revolution her winning streak against all of them is brought to an end
when the student council president toga

tricks utena into believing that he is the Rose Prince from her childhood though
after utena finds her courage

again she defeats him handedly the first Arc is privy to a number

of oddities outside of the premise of dueling in the upside down floating Castle
in the Sky where eternity lies

with the power to bring Revolution to the world toa's younger sister nmy seems
to have a bit of a complex like a very

strong fixation that by far exceeds protective but don't worry it

does get weirder the first Arc does a lot of the heavy lifting in terms of
establishing

the rules of the world and the themes running through the whole series
subsequent plot arcs just get deeper and

more unsettling truth be told the second Arc doesn't really do much to elaborate

on the plot though it is important for establishing some guiding mechanics of
this world as well as introducing some

key players for the ongoing series through a plot divised to kill the rose bride
and replace her we see a

recurrence of the same weapons the student council used to challenge and Jenna
we had seen the sword of dios a

powerful weapon and the key to the power of Revolution being removed from
anthy's chest in her capacity as the rosebride

and this seems to be her primary role as the rosebride just as anthy's body
hosts

the sword of dios initially each student council member hosts their own blade in
the third Arc however anony no longer is

host to the sword of dios instead she draws a blade from utena's body that's
important keep that in mind we get to it

later the other primary element of the second Arc is introducing anthy's brother
AIO and hey if you thought nomy

and toga stuff was a little weird we got a couple episodes into the second Arc
with AIO and Ane and like yeah they're

uh yeah anthy come

here I really don't want another content strike from YouTube I already have one
so as graphic as this is I am simply

going to to euphemize and refer to it as domestic abuse Akio is the principal
villain of the series and was both end

of the world as well as the rose prince who gave utena her ring which drawing a
parallel to utena's duel with toga

akio's primary objective seems to be to feminize utena and groom her because

utena is under the impression that she's basically promised herself to the
prince from her childhood she is magnetically

drawn to him this naturally causes anthy to Fester due to being so gaslit her

whole life that she feels her only sense of value is to be of service to men
something that utena is interrupting and

the once best friends develop a toxic rivalry I put a lot of poison in your

tea you don't say as one does the girls appear to resolve their differences when

utena rescues anthy from an unal living attempt and acknowledges that this is
kind of completely up after a

final stab at gaslighting utena into believing that it's her time to shed her
juvenile boyish fantasies and be a

proper lady to be valuable to him and presumably by extension societ at large
utena challenges Akio to a duel for

anthy's fate Akio basically says that the dueling rules are different now a
because he'll straight up murder her if

she loses and B because the dueling Arena may or may not have existed and may
have been a hologram this whole time

but don't worry we've yet to hit the summit of weird Mountain guarding anthy
from her brother utena is stabbed in the

back by anthy who upon the command of her brother has accepted that it's

simply her role in life to suffer according to a man who has been domestically
abusing his own sister for

who knows how long Akio claims that she has chosen this and that she's happy

like this and now she actually enjoys living in this pathetic tortured role

she can no longer be happy except like this looking at real world parallels a

given individual can endure much less debilitating physical and psychological
trauma and be ruled as unfit by the

state to make their own decisions there are a number of other hints and
instances in the plot that strongly

indicate that anthy's willpower is so eroded that she has no sense of
self-preservation whatsoever and is

emotionally stunted to the point where she needs people to make decisions for
her because she does not know how to

think for herself something that utena has been trying to get her to realize
about herself this whole time with anthy

being stabbed by the swords of hatred probably men's hatred it's symbolic or not
we'll talk about it Akio takes the

sword from utena and tries to open the door that guards the power to
revolutionize the world and finally oops

it broke not that it really matters what can you possibly get for the man who
has everything Whiskey

Stones it's not like any of this really mattered it's fine Lenna meanwhile

desperately claws at the rose thorns that guard the power of revolution in a
sheer refusal to give up on anony for

which I'm sure there's a heterosexual explanation somehow and in a final attempt
to free anony from the cofin of

her psyche the floor gives out and utena is left wounded defeated and at the
mercy of all the swords that Akio forced

upon anthy so that they would not attack him Flash Forward a few weeks and utena

is not in school and all of the students have begun to forget her save for anthy

and AIA the latter is disappointed that utena never managed to use the power to
revolutionize the world and begins a new

scheme to try it all again anthy however declares that she'll have no part of
this and next to a bewildered brother

announces that she's leaving otori Academy to find aenna the manga and the movie
have some vast differences but

maintain the overall themes this is primarily going to cover the anime but will
include some elements of the movie

in order to elaborate on themes because on top of what I just narrated there's a
whole mythology and some magic realism

and anmy in general that is going on at the same time and specifically in the
realm of magic realism the sword of Dos

dos himself the upside down Castle anthy's magic and backstory as a witch and
just a whole lot more I am going to

drop some bombs because my reading of revolutionary girl Lenna seems to be
vastly different than the bulk of the

discourse I have found not to mention the actual Wikipedia page and sure you
could take it literally you could assume

that Doos was the former incarnation of AIO who was transformed SL imprisoned by

anthy who is a witch a damsel in distress and also simultaneously the vesage of
all men's hatred who

desperately want Prince Doos to deflower their daughter and that's not outside
the realm of normal for anime or we can

observe revolutionary girl Lieutenant as a deeply allegorical and symbolic story
about the struggles of coming of age amidst widespread institutional

corruption in a high school and which describes a passive culture of inaction in
regard to Brazen instances of

domestic exploitation in which there is not only a question about the capore
reality of the events transpiring but

also which events can be taken for granted and which events are meant to signify
abstract sociological

institutions which may be otherwise difficult to articulate in fiction which is
quite frankly a lot more effort but

unfortunately we have postmodernism so I guess we have to [Music]

Part 2

try postmodernism is a literary artistic and philosophical school of thought

something something Wikipedia uses big words what you need to know is that
postmodernism is a response to the

modernism movement which hit its peak in the 1920s it's complicated there was a
lot of overlap especially when looking

at areas of study which began to shift away from the modernist movement
architecture was the first area to

significantly adapt a style that would be referred to as postmodern in contrast
to the modernists postmodernism is

rooted heavily in relativism and implores a rejection of stable and concrete let
alone Universal truths due

to the focus around ephemerality identity and especially the ways that identity
may be concealed or altered in

a world which is chronically changing revolutionary girl lutena conforms
miraculously to this school of thought

and quite frankly it seems to be a shining Exemplar of presenting these tenants
in a way that is clear though

compelling enough to be more than just a textbook case this is considered one of
the most significant and influential

animes of the '90s for a very good reason now it's easy to see how this anime
fits into a postmodern framework

from the theme alone you've got a bunch of teenagers who are not only struggling
with ways to project their true selves

into the world but also struggling to reconcile what that true self even is
there is an ongoing discussion about

gender developing sexuality Coming of Age direct and indirect challenges to
establish values a question of Truth

Versus illusion a distrust of therapy that feels at home with Scientology and
ultimately a threat of losing oneself in

a sea of modernity that's lowercase modernity by the way prominent in postmodern
writing are unreliable

narrators imagery of mirrors masks being trapped in Lial spaces a use of glitter

to describe seemingly important things of little value and a strong prominence
of feminist ideals and themes given the

post-modernism not to be confused with postmodernity which is a different thing
kind of seems to hold a particular focus

on the appearance versus reality of something and also challenging the belief of
objective truth second W

feminism felt very at home when post-modern thought made its way into literature
by the 19 60s the two could

often be spoken of in the same breath they both Drew roots from the rise of
existentialist thought that endured the

second world war spurred by an intellectual school of thought that placed
importance on the self and

developing a sense of self-worth based on action rather than Birthright or
strictly through Labor also unfortunate

is that existentialism was a primary influence for Aon Rand and her school of
objectivism still an ongoing Trend

within stories with a female lead was that in order to frame The Narrative
towards emotional validation The

Narrative needed to contain the typical post-modern elements of social
destabilization which leads us back to

utena where the very plot is about Revolution and whether or not a tomboyish
young girl has the ability or

the right to be responsible for it but you're here for the hot takes right what
does this have to do with that

throughout utena there is both an element of magic realism juxtaposed against
the reality of High School drama

in spite of the fact that these are high school students they fight Grand
fencing duels in a stadium in the sky where an

inverted Castle floats above the student council has this anxious anticipation
about their ability to self-actualize an

anxieties about growing up while at the same time carrying the kind of weight
and Authority one would expect from

feudal politics it's like Game of Thrones with Minik skirts in my reading of
otna there is very little that we can

verifiably say is not symbolic or directly allegorical of something this anime
incorporates nearly every

significant icon of postmodern language it would be wrong to assume that this is
not deeply allegorical what have we just

going to take the doo stuff seriously when it serves the plot much more
significantly to say that the background

mythology is meant to characterize the way these characters interact my reading
of this media is that there isn't a

whole lot we can take at face value and much much more that we can assume is

Fantastical illusion meant to convey deeper meaning about what the author has to
say about power abuse control

schooling and Adolescence in general especially because the final two episodes
strongly imply even misleadingly that everything Fantastical

about this story from the duels the castle the power of Doos was an illusion
projected by Holograms though in the

same breath where AIO explains that people see a castle because they're too
naive to see the power of the Chairman's residence they see the more literal

power of a castle Akio doesn't seem to question himself at all and whether or
not the Chairman's office is an illusion

he is choosing to see in a discourse on power it's very heavily implied that the
Chairman's Authority is representative

of a broader definition of higher authority evidence of his own self-deception
is that he too buys into

the fantasy of the power of Doos which seems to reside exclusively in this room

of Illusions and therefore where he failed to breach the door to that power with
a sword he drew from utena's chest

utena accomplishes this all on her own so if we are dealing with a plot that is

primarily an illusion then how are we supposed to interpret what was going on at
all and

more importantly what does it all mean [Music]

Part 3

the weird thing about an analysis like this is that you kind of have to gauge
what this anime is actually about before

you begin to look for supporting instances something tricky about utena is that
some things are allegorically coded and other things are meant to be

taken a face value it's not always clear which is meant to be which a basic
premise is that uten atenu is a middle

school student who is struggling to navigate adolescence if we assume that this
is is real as the more Universal

experience that a young lady can expect in her life then all elements outside
the realm of normal can be seen as

symbolic reflections of struggles that middle school students will go through
especially because all discourse around the duels and the rosebride and the

floating Castle in the Sky are not accessible to most of the student body only
the student council and a handful

of students know about these things the rest of the students are just students
this creates a broad yet

clearly defined separation between the Fantastical events events and the literal
ones and this is also primarily

why I prefer the anime to the movie The separation between reality and illusion
is a little bit more defined whereas in

the movie adolescence of utena students participated in these duels as the
audience it makes the symbolism of

everything around anthy a little bit more literal except when you get to the
whole cars thing that said the movie was

much less about the question of identity and more about escaping the oppressive
elements of conformity in school the

movie itself I view as more of a compan piece to the anime beefing up secondary

thematic messaging that was present in the anime and clarifying some character
motivations for instance toa's romantic

feelings for utena were genuine and that shiori really is just that that bad

though utena's revamped design was a great Improvement I felt granted the whole
movie is just gorgeous painting

the school as an mcer esque prison of militant Conformity it's also just a lot
gayer there's a reason why I chose to

focus on the anime specifically both the film and the manga are worth their own
analysis each the only major overlapping

symbol is that cars represent adulthood and passage into adulthood a problem
with postmodern analysis is that

symbolic language and what is presented as real events can often be overlapping
an element of realism is important in

most stories as most audiences need these real events to identify within their
own lives in order to empathize

with the characters there is a degree of uncertainty when gauging analysis and
the temptation to assume that everything

is symbolic which I feel gives a lot of undo complexity to work that is
otherwise meant to just be

straightforward to bring up an example nobody's going to expect and I mean
nobody look at the music video for

Wrecking Ball by Miley Cyrus I do like Miley but this one was a bit of a Miss
she responded to criticism of the video

describing it as weird and unnecessary by claiming that the whole Lick in the
hammer thing was symbolic of a failed

relationship or something a problem with the video is that it is under the
assumption that the audience is going to read these visuals as symbolic without

the music video itself doing anything to suggest that these things are symbolic
the lyrics also don't do a whole lot to

play off of the housebreaking imagery of a wrecking ball besides that one line
the end result is a weird sexual trist

with inanimate construction site objects which seems to be playing off of
nothing but the song but that's a Creator

assuming that Their audience will read symbolism into their work without prompt
it can work in the other direction too

taking Lord of the Rings as an example and this is entirely hypothetical it
would be like saying that Aragorn kicking the orc helmet and crying out in

anguish is symbolic of his rejection of Regal responsibilities resulting in the
suffering of those around him no he's

kicking a helmet because he's frustrated that he's misplaced his Hobbits and
screaming because vgo mortson accidentally broke his foot kicking that

helmet now if the plot made a specific point of Aragorn repeatedly kicking or

pushing objects away from him with due consequences then yes we could say that
this action carries symbolic weight but

only only if it's repeated and only if through repetition the audience can see

evolution in Aragorn's internal conflict and unfortunately there aren't any
solid rules about when we should observe an

action or element as symbolic and when we should dismiss it as taken for granted
because if you want to establish

a rule then some author at some point in history has made a masterpiece textbook
example of a symbolic device that breaks

that rule the primary reason that AI will never be able to replace artists is
because the collection of values that

are used to present literary devices can shift from one artist to the next it's
a matter of Merit to have the kind of

creative judgment to discern how an audience will interpret literary devices and
in the language of each individual

author there is a variable ability to present meaning in variable ways using

variable methods tldr if there's a rule then it would not be art the quality of
an artist is gauged by their ability not

only to make their own rules but to efficiently project that set of rules to
Their audience we live in a world world

where Watchmen carry slaughterhouse 5 and The Color Purple are all considered
post-modern masterpieces yet their

syntactic mechanics narrative structure and even their very underlying
philosophies are foundationally

different though in utena there seems to be one side character who is able to
appropriately frame the realism from the

symbolism though she's in less than about half of the total episodes utena's
best friend wakaba is the most important

character for Discerning what is meant to be symbolic wakaba is a regular girl
whose incredibly gay and not at all

involved in the component of dueling that takes place in the school wakaba sees
conflict between the dualists but

not the duels themselves she's the cipher character with whom the audience can
appreciate what the average student

would see I would argue that whatever wakaba sees is what the audience can take
for granted is the reality of what's transpiring everything else

including very personal moments such as anthy's attempted unal living and even
including things that happen in the real

world such as school teacher sexual exploiting his female students can be read
as symbolic representations of

something more abstract and even if we do read those aformentioned issues as
real that doesn't also mean that they

can't carry additional symbolic value to a larger abstract concept they're just

very well-developed Concepts and because of wakaba we can approach them with
uncertainty rather than confusion this

is the principle of my thoughts on Attack on Titan where I felt that things that
fans and detractors argued were

symbolic were just too messy and inconsistent and contradictory to be set

in stone allegories okay this is a world where people can get bone marrow
injections and turn into giant monsters

who depending on the circumstances may or may not have sentient reasoning based
on an ambiguous rule of genetic Heritage

but also magic 2 at this point if anything goes World building Attack on Titan
goes out of its way to establish

that weird happens in this world and can be accepted as fact rather than
allegory whereas revolutionary girl

lutena does not do that which is something something you could accept about
utena except for wakaba who yes

participates in one duel but she was brainwashed and has no recollection of it
wakaba is the element ofnormal in

this cast things that happen in her awareness are certain wakaba is like us

the audience we don't pull Weaponry out of random people or have uncommon hair
colors I'm sorry almost none of us are

main characters in an anime and therefore what happens outside of waba's
awareness is subject to discourse on

Truth or Illusion because of wakaba we can read some of the more weird things

in this plot as symbolic and not just absurd not that utena doesn't have some
absurd things but even something

seemingly benign and uselessly cute like cho cho serves to help characterize
anthy as a sympathetic character who is

earnest in her sensitivity rather than at being a front to help her brother
groom girls at the school cares about

animals is the tried andrue method in anime of signifying that the audience
ought to empathize with a given

character okay Mr we're studying so so I'll have to see you later did you like
eating that mean old snake but

there's a lot more to dig into than simple [Music]

Part 4

symbology probably the most prominent symbol in the entire show is the sword of
dios aside from being the key that

gives access to the power of Revolution it is made symbolic by how it is
acquired it being removed from anthy's

chest can be read as symbolic rather other than your average magical girl
transformation stock footage it's very

easy in any work of fiction to observe weapons as symbols of power this is
almost Universal what's a little more

creative is when a Creator questions what a weapon is so given that a small

yet significant collection of the student body run around spontaneously pulling
swords out of their chesticles

this isn't something that we can really dismiss the power to revolutionize the
world is hidden behind a gate for which

the sword of Dos is the key to access in order to get this power dualists
usually men need to extract this power from the

body of a woman however they do not possess this power on their own they need a
woman as an accessory to their

Ambitions even if the ambition is to protect the woman granted it probably

should not get lost on us that dios means god in Latin and a number of other
romance languages even in the Japanese

language versions he's called dios and I'm not going to get too deep into that
especially with the language of

apocalypse and Revolution that's a whole master's degree dissertation right
there however the figure of Dio as a character

is important to the plot and in my opinion a rather contentious one a surface
level reading of Doos is that he

is either a god a reflection of a god a prince who died ages ago or a collection
of household insects given material form

by anthy depending on the version of your story now yes if you want to you can
look at him like that and that who

he was is now a spectre that resides in the sword Andor Castle he is the figure
who gave utena her signant ring and

inspired her to become a prince and he is not AIO though can be read as and is

occasionally a reflection of AIO for all that dios is approached with the
language of the Christian God akio's

name is derived from a Japanese character used in the name for Venus the Morning
Star which is associated with

Lucifer Lucifer which is dare I say a misappropriated name for Satan Lucifer

instead originally referred to a Persian God Of The Morning Light and Satan
actually means the accuser not the devil

he was God's prosecutor not his enemy Frenemies but anyway religion and anime
fun so yes the literal reading is there

but that's boring when there's so much symbolism of foot dios is simply more
useful as a tool to explain the

motivations of characters that do exist than as a character himself when a
character is a character but is not a

character but represents an internal character foil that prends to their
identity that may be a figurative mask

but a mask nevertheless so dos doesn't exist not strictly he exists as a

concept given a name the concept cept is nobility chivalry and power the subject
of nobility is also noteworthy in utena

the prince of roses as a concept seems to hold a different meaning to each
character to aenna the prince is the

archetype of the nobility she wants to represent one may even say a transition
icon if you want to adopt that reading

of utena however additional instances of castles princesses damsels and evil
witches also enrich this symbolic

language the castle may be an illusion kind of AIO says it is but then hinges
his entire plan on breaking open an

illusion door so I don't [Music]

Part 5

know the castle itself represents a curious element of the story's Politics on
gender the final leg of the third Arc

heavily deals with AIO attempting to convince utena to put down the sword and be
a proper lady which utena feels

compelled to do nearly everyone who sees the upside down Castle wants to go
there to make all their dreams come true

whatever those dreams may be it makes it easy for someone like Akio to
manipulate others under the promise that he can

make those dreams a reality what's noteworthy is that the castle is tantalizing
but it's also inaccessible

it is in fact only accessible through engagement to the Rose bride the reality
of this Castle is challenged by two

things first yes that Akio claims that it's an illusion an illusion within an
illusion one could say very Inception

but also that it is upside down we know from the study of symbols that when a
given symbol is inverted it holds an

opposite meaning take a castle what does it represent monarchy regality nobility

safety and fantasy a castle as a symbol if inverted still carries those values

but instead becomes an ironic subversion of those values it's the difference
between saying a castle wall is meant to

keep the bride safe or maybe that it's meant to keep her imprisoned an inverted

Castle says the latter it's also significant that as utena faces Akio in

this climactic confrontation she begins to understand the ways that her
childhood fantasies of princes and princesses have been used to manipulate

her into being just a girl her realization is marked by the upside down

Castle's collapse the symbolic language of this Castle is a bit different in
adolescence of utena while it seems to

be a grand magnificent Castle it's actually a giant tank underneath whose
shifting wheels and Treads form a

labyrinth that one is not meant to escape and in the movie as in the anime

AIO is directly related to this castle and the princely figure of Doos this
becomes more significant through the

third Arc to AIO dos uniquely represents who he believes he is and who he feels

other people ought to see him as an illusion he himself buys into so strongly
that others also believe it

Dio's story is told several different ways by several different characters and

no story is entirely consistent the common Trend in his Fable however is that he
has a sister he seeks a damsel

in distress and that he is tricked by a witch and imprisoned all of these
figures are anthy at the same time Dio's

imprisonment Andor death as a result of the witch's actions even though her
motivations range from malicious to

oblivious seems to be what every version of this story frames as the root cause
for all the world's problems the world

still hadn't Fallen completely Into Darkness then the reason for this was
because there was a rose Prince not only

is Akio a victim for having his God could removed but the whole of the world is
worse off for it and that through his

intention to use the power of Revolution he will re-empower himself to his
rightful status as someone

who has the ability to do anything he wants without consequences which is going
to make the

world a better place because returning his power to him is Poetic Justice
returning to him something that he lost

and all of this has been to say that the role of dios is for Akio to betray his

internal motivations to the audience it is her punishment for taking the prince
away from the girls of the world so

through a postmodern lens we can use this to characterize AIO to offer context
for his actions in his mind he

is dios and his version of dios offered himself to the world and the world's
princesses and the world was better for

it within the shadow play there is language to suggest that he had the ability
to fight monsters to protect

people in akio's elaboration later on in the same episode it subtly implied that
Doos gets power from deflowering the

princesses of the world and by the wi taking away his unbridled ability to get
his dick wet he lost his ability to

maintain peace and order in the world his exploitation of anthy in that light is
a means by which he can recover the

power he perceives she stole from him in the most postmodern way possible this
is

what I mean when I said that this might not even be literal exploitation because
this kind of demonstration can be

extrapolated to indicate any kind of power and balance in this relationship this
can signify any kind of control or

abuse but the instance of exploitation here is used because assault has Deep

Roots as indicating that akio's gender is the source of his imbalance however

there is also an invitation to observe this conflict of princes damsels and
witches as itself representative of a

greater cultural hole the plot outlines that exploitation of all kinds is
damaging not just the sexual instances

outlined here and how in the situation of a life's worth of gaslighting someone
can actively believe that their only

role in life is to be a victim people generally feel good when they are
reassured of their self existing in the

world when you have been told that yourself is to be a victim over time your
brain can cross those wires

suddenly victimhood feels good because you get that positive reassurance
dopamine hit ane's Conformity to the

Rose bride is based around the fact that she feels good being subservient
because this is the only thing in her life that

has ever brought her any kind of positive reward it takes the entire series iies
for utena to shake her out

of this mindset and she begins to see herself as her own person and the really
cool thing is that we're now at a point

of analysis where we can get to the exciting stuff because the language of
plurality it can apply to these

characters themselves so that we're not just talking about AIO anthy and oena

but the ways that AIO is a standin for every man and that Ane represents every

victim and that utena represents a kind of a woman so we arrive at a game state

where men seek the power of Revolution to facilitate their control over women
which they already have mostly in order

to return to times when things were better lacking the freedom to commit

sexual exploitation to AIO and therefore men like him impedes their ability to

properly manage the world and keep everything safe this power that was once

exclusively theirs they perceive was stolen from them by the women who they

are already exploiting utena's role is to signify a new kind of woman this

woman cannot be defeated by the traditional means and therefore the method of
dealing with them is to remove

their power by feminizing them and ultimately groom them to accept their own
exploitation and that's just what

you get from the end of the world stuff which is probably one of the weirder
parts of aenna until you get to the turning into cars thing but I digress

there's a lot more that aenna has to say about power Truth Versus illusion
schooling adolescence

in conjunction with other symbols and themes like the upside down castle and the
power of

[Music]

Part 6

Revolution this is about the Revolutionary girl utena after all which

is strange because for all that the language of revolution is dangled over her
head she seems to reject it power

structure itself is something all versions of utena seems to discuss and seem to
come to a singular conclusion

that the objective of those in power is to facilitate their control by crafting
the Next Generation into drones and this

is clearest in the movie The power Brokers don't need to get their hands dirty
when they can just organize an increasingly complicated schedule of

duels to sick the students onto each other another reading of AIO outside of
Doos in the revolution is that his

surname is otori which is different from his sister's Hima otori being the same

name as the academy again rather than a singular individual he could represent a
broader scope of authority figures in

school ring institutions this could range from statutory malice to Mere
unprofessionalism I mean there is a lot

more to utena than AIO I'm sorry if my focus is here at the expense of spending

basically no time talking about nomy oh this can't be I was so close to becoming

the idol of the school I can't seem to think clearly anymore am I having

delusions do I need my appendix removed bring me a blanket someone and

S shut up girl needs help I'm sure that whole ordeal is symbolic for something

anyway the ability of a single element of the show to function in a myriad of
ways with multiple applications speaks

to the Creator's credit even if and this is often the case with authors many of
these meanings were unintended an

authorial ability to deconstruct the world into a collection of symbols that
have this kind of universality showcases

a Savvy and insightful creative team however there is something thus far

this is a show called The Revolutionary girl utena what is this Revolution and

how is utena the one to be revolutionary if she spends most of the anime trying
to prevent others from using Revolution

the use of revolution in the show is only slightly different from how we would
use it it's not something like the

retirement of the French aristocracy a nation becoming independent from a parent
state or even say Bernie Sanders

attempting to impose a tax structure in America that's similar to what existed
in the 1960s Revolution itself in utena

seems to be an object one would use revolution the same way you would use a
toaster and those who know that the

power of Revolution resides at otori Academy seem to be desperate to use it but
even though they talk about

Revolution as if it were a power or a tool the language of postmodernism opens

up a number of possibilities for what use revolution serves to the characters to
the plot and to the audience when the

characters talk about the power to Revolution the world it means we little media
analysts that we are don't have to

look at it as a Kamehameha blast we can approach it as a vaguely established and
largely undefined quality of being able

to bring about a significant change to the world which helps establish the
deeper motivations of what each

character wants to use revolution to do of course tied into this theme of
Revolution are Miracles and Eternity and

since I can't read or understand Japanese I may be losing something in the
translation because miracle are often associated with Christian imagery

instead I think the plot is much more in line with Alan Moore's sense of
Miracles

a miracle is a thing that shouldn't be possible but is in utena Miracles seem to
be things that afford a false sense

of hope the cynical believe this thing is impossible even if it is actually true
this is the primary driving element

of jwy who is in love with her ex bestie and considers it an impossibility that
this little psycho would ever

reciprocate those feelings the hope that she might or that she could is the
source of jory's toxicity which

leads to jory's deeper motivation she wants to eliminate miracles from the world
she wants to use revolution to

purge herself of Hope which is a recurring pattern with all dualists their
intended uses for the power of

Revolution are self-directed yes seonji desperately wants the long-term and
stable affection of a subservient woman

namely anthy but even if these intentions aren't specifically malicious a
character like Mickey wants to use

eternity to preserve and protect an an though only for him to use as a muse to
this he needs to first take control of

her whereas utena's motivations are to liberate anthy utena stands out because
not only does she have no use for

revolution she seems to reject it and even imply that she doesn't really believe
in any of it her exclusive

motivation is to protect anthy from the predatorial intentions of the other
dualists treating the duels as symbolic

depicts these conflicts as indicative of the ways young people clash as they
develop identity though the student

council postures itself as a itical body they do amount to a collection of young
people who are very nervous about their

future and questioning what role they are going to have in the world having the
power to revolutionize the world

means that they can have a hand on the wheel deliberate driving metaphor from
the student council's introductory

monologue it may seem like something a villain would say to announce themselves
prepare for trouble make it double

however the more we begin to empathize with the student council the more we
begin to see this monologue as a

desperate bid to take take control of their anxieties if it cannot break out of
its shell the chick will die without

ever being born we are the chick the world is our egg if we don't crack the

world's shell we will die without truly being born liutenant Echoes a particular

anxiety of growing up in Japan in the 1990s when the nation was in one of the
worst Financial depressions in its

history to many it did feel like the end of the world and discourse around
Revolution was not far off we'll get

more into that in an upcoming Evangelion video I promise and if Japanese Youth
of the 9s got it anything like Millennials

of the late 2000s got it then it would have seemed like the entire weight of the
world was imparted on their

shoulders to fix things all the while the powers at be insisting that fixing

things was the responsibility of the nation's youth simultaneously scolded them
for talking about upsetting The

Establishment values that led to these hardships in the first place especially
towards the end of the second Arc

discourse around growing up takes a a central role as a driving theme and then

suddenly we get the third season and everyone is in cars and their shirts are
flying off and is Aio toga not

that AIO doesn't have these chaotic by Vibes but what does a casual approach to
sexuality have to do with

Part 7

[Music] cars right so as indicated in an episode

where nm's younger boyfriend desperately wants to be a grown-up so that he can
interact with women the way that he sees older boy doing there is a single line

questioning when someone becomes an adult the gang tosses around a few things
that signify the kind of adulthood that they have in their mind

and one of them is driving a car and then the third Arc becomes all about
driving cars where we see AIO basically

grooming the student body into helping him indoctrinate utena these scenes can
be read as an older man ushering high

school students into adulthood at times before they're ready but also certainly
on his terms and not theirs akio's

depiction of adulthood is suave mysterious and sexy even though his

promises seem to ring adulthood there's an unspoken reminder that they are in

his car even during the duel where each respective Pretender bride is driving
around trying to vehicular manslaughter

Renna they are in his car they are not in their own cars it's not until seonji

begins to question why toga is letting himself be manipulated into being akio's
wingman that we see them in their own

vehicle with togga driving songji a scene we can read as these two young men
breaking away from the patterns of

manipulation and oppression that have been established by the adults in their
lives and that isn't to say that either

of these young men don't have a lot to make up for but they have a better shot
at doing the right thing while cutting

their own path rather than being under the tutelage of someone like Akio this is
doubled down on in the movie where

the student council members including zongji appear at the end to help anthy
Escape so what is revolution in probably

the most post modern turn of events that's never made clear what exactly is this
power that everyone wanted to use

abuse and exploit anthy Andor women in general to get a hold of what made all of
this worth it especially because the

power is found in a castle in the sky that is described as an illusion generated
by a holographic machine but

described by a character who is routinely outlined as being unreliable Akio as
aformentioned was unable to

access the power of Revolution and not because he didn't have the power of Doos
which took from utena after he had her

stabbed in the back he breaks the sword of dios and Revolution remains
exclusively Out Of Reach This tracks

thematically because what honestly was Akio going to give himself with
Revolution that he didn't already have

his entire plot to bewitch utena was just to try and convince her to relinquish
Revolution to him but Dodges

the question whenever anyone asks him what he wants to do power for power's sake
he was already doing a bang up job

at finding a horde of people to ship his sister off to as the rosebride but
somehow his greatest desire and deepest

anxiety stemmed from losing control of his sister especially to another man and

I can imagine the prospect of losing his sister to a woman is nothing short of
IM

mascula is this a good place to mention that corrective rape is the most common
form of sexual assault imposed on

lesbians asexuals and transmen and it means exactly what it sounds like and

while he may Express disappointment utena for not being able to bring Revolution
to the world he's met with a

nasty surprise that the key to his martyrdom is suddenly making decisions for
herself and worse yet using that new

power to leave him so we the audience can easily interpret that as a victory in
spite of utena's apparent defeat that

yes she somehow did manage to use the power of Revolution and she used it in an
impossible selfless way she liberated

her best friend from a toxic power Dynamic she had with her family and for those
who know getting someone to

abandon a toxic family environment even if it is emotionally and psychologically
damaging is next to Impossible many

people who try to separate a friend from a toxic family end up having to abandon
their friendship to protect their own mental health through a not so

allegorical reading we can say utena did the same that ultimately in spite of
her bravado and nobility she had to throw in

the towel anime can show teenagers saving the world from interdimensional
vampires all it once presenting a story

where a teenager can engage with deeply toxic authority figures without
deep-seated emotional scars is always

going to be more unrealistic anthy's final decision to leave the school and find
utena speaks to her acknowledgement

that she has been a participant in this and that she wants to make things right
this also Echoes the Final Act of

adolescence of utena where she becomes the literal vehicle of anthy's Escape
rather than the figurative vehicle in

the anime however this is a postmodern reading which means this isn't utena

anthy and AIO but a new wave of conventional women the suffering and victimhood
of all women and the

patriarchal values that oppress women utena prophesies women and their struggle
to free themselves from

victimhood and how this uphill battle will have casualties because in this
context we can appropriately examine one

of the more elusive Concepts eternity which is spoken of frequently but has

even less elaboration than Revolution does both eternity and Revolution are said
to exist in the upside down Castle

you'd think that eternity and the power of Revolution would be contradictory
things and you'd be correct utena's

hidden driving force through the entire plot is to reconnect with the prince who
gave her the signant ring it's implied

that the prince Akio showed her something Eternal which she now seeks to attain
and Akio uses this to groom utena

into believing the Eternal thing she seeks is a romance with her prince but

Akio was never the prince utna was trying to find it was her all along the
signate

ring may have brought her closer to this Prince however she was the prince she

was looking for though as more information is revealed to aenna she remembers
that no it was not a rose

scented embrace the prince showed her he showed her the witch Frozen in Time

bearing hateful swords in her body for all of eternity and this is both
punishment and Justice this is how the

world must be the Witch and anthy must bear this

hatred utena sees this as Injustice and her vow to become a prince is not in

honor of the prince who rescued her her bravado is not due to a pep talk from a
handsome man her drive to become a

prince her will her determination her very driving motivation that she herself
does not remember is to free anony from

the swords of men who somehow believe that all women are responsible for the
suffering of the world and that a

woman's only cont contribution in this world is to endure suffering for the

benefit of a man utena's princely Quest is not just

to rescue anthy but to rescue all the damsels in distress to rescue all women

from suffering by empowering them to rescue

themselves