---
date: 2022-12-01
title: The Gay Body Image Crisis
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "How Fascism Created The Gay Body Image Crisis"
topics: !!seq
  - Nazis
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-videos-backup"
  - "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7PA6EsHhKxI" # Reuploads channel
# description: "a video essay on...?"
notes:
  - hbomb

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
{% assign tustin = site.data.cite.tustin2121 %}

<compare>
<credits class="desc">

A lot of horrible things have happened because of the rise of the far right. But would you guess that the gay body image crisis is one of them?

00:00 Introduction  
10:25 1. The Axis  
19:46 2. A Model Citizen  
27:13 3. Industrialization  
36:50 4. The Ubermensch  

</credits>
</compare>

{% include transcript-start %}

why are queer men hyper focused on body image it may involve a social philosophy
called objectification which is the act of treating persons as objects or things
dehumanizing them and making them sexual objects instead of real people gay men
more so than heterosexual men tend to self-objectify and place higher importance
on physical attractiveness body image issues aren't unique to queer men but
toxic thoughts pertaining to self-worth and physical care are dangerously
prevalent within the community open an app like grinder and you'll be greeted
with body shaming phrases so familiar and cliche that straight people even know
about them too no fats no Femmes Gym Fit only I work out so should you this
incessant need to achieve a hot body has become incredibly prevalent with even
men with literal Superhero level bodies complaining about feeling fat on
Instagram the pressure can trigger more than just social media jealousy though
research published in 2019 by Dalhousie University found that social demands
placed upon gay men to eat healthily and achieve a perfect body are linked to
anxiety and depression and have serious mental health consequences the national
eating disorder Association also says that lgbtq plus identified folks
experience unique stressors that may contribute to the development of an eating
disorder one such stressor the inability to meet body ideals within some lgbtq
plus cultural contexts approximately 84 percent of gay men say they feel under
intense pressure to have a body culturally defined as hot not healthy or even
fit hot they are three times more likely than straight men to have body image
issues only one percent stated that they were very happy with their appearance
and those unhappy with their appearance continue to struggle with it well into
middle age and Beyond of course in the social media era our phones make it
easier than ever to fall into the toxic trap of comparing ourselves to others in
every way this person has a nicer home this person has a nicer car that person
has more followers this person seems to look like Chris Evans in full Captain
America mode every moment of every day when the fact of the matter is that Chris
Evans doesn't even like looking like Captain America part of the reason he was
so vehement about his decision to not continue portraying the character was
because of the intense demands on his body it's also part of the reason he'd
request shirtless scenes in his movies if he was going to suffer to look like
that he was going to make sure that everyone could see it famously during the
filming of Captain America's Civil War he asked the directors if his shirt could
rip off while he was holding a helicopter to a landing pad they figured it would
have been a bit much in order to get his body in the kind of Tip-Top condition
that made Hayley Atwell slip out of character for a minute his daily routine was
grueling and his meal plan was bleak low carb heavy green vegetables and meal
supplements and to boot anytime you see his body he dehydrated himself for at
least 48 Hours leading up to the Chute people don't just look like that it is a
full-time job not only to get into shape like that but to keep yourself in shape
like that and given how imbalanced your nutritional intake needs to be on top of
intermittent dehydration it's not healthy to sustain that kind of body type for
very long it's not possible to look like that all the time and expecting someone
to look like that at all is a little absurd how much life do you miss out on by
living at the gym that much the pressure to conform to a certain body type is
even harder to get a grip on when the Finish Line keeps getting pushed back over
time as a younger gay man I was told that I was too fat and would never be
accepted in this world skinny was the only way forward and I was told that was
easy to achieve I could just eat less and be more active and lose weight if only
it were that simple as I've mentioned in previous videos I came out pretty young
I was 12 when I first started telling people that I was gay because I was just
too damn impatient to wait any longer I wanted a boyfriend and I wanted one ASAP
through my teen years finding other gay people was near impossible but when I
did manage to find one I always got the same response ew you're fat go away it
was basically those words every time without variation sometimes it felt like
they'd all gotten together and written a script which didn't help my body issues
at all you see I was sent to a dietitian when I was seven years old my doctors
didn't think that my baby fat was coming off fast enough and wanted it under
control so I was put on a strict calorie controlled diet that my parents my
friends parents and my extended family made sure I followed to a T later on I
was told that this kind of dieting at such a young age may have actually stunted
my growth since most of my male cousins are well over six feet tall but despite
the diet I continued to gain weight the only explanation from The dietitian was
that I must be cheating or that my parents must be slipping me snacks the blame
was placed squarely on actions not body chemistry no tests were run to see if
maybe I had a malfunctioning thyroid or anything like that I was just eating too
much plain and simple eventually my mother stopped taking me to see The
dietitian because I only left there feeling worse about myself every time and As
I Grew into my teenage years I continued to gain weight on and on the pounds
came until I was well over 300 pounds come High School graduation I didn't start
losing weight at all until I went on a crash diet during film school since I
could barely afford rent let alone Three Square meals a day I was only taking in
about 400 calories and even on that stranded in the mountains about to start
contemplating eating your friend's diet I only lost about 20 pounds in six
months obviously there was something wrong not only did I feel physically
horrible since asthma plus excess weight does not equal a good time but I felt
emotionally horrible because I was now 22 had been out for a decade and never
had a real life boyfriend I dated guys online but never showed them anything but
my face in the rare occasion that they'd see my midsection six months of talking
would go out the window as I got blocked so I felt like garbage and decided to
find out what was wrong there had to be an imbalance somewhere in my body so
when I moved home after film school I made my doctor send me for every test he
could think of for any condition that could lead to weight gain or difficulty
losing weight everything came back fine I was perfectly healthy except for the
extra 120 pounds I was carrying around so he sent me to a new dietitian and
three months later following her direct meal plans I'd gained back the 20 pounds
I'd lost in film school and then some again I was told that I must be cheating
and not following the plan the plan was white rice steamed chicken with water or
black coffee with a multivitamin my mom thought it was crazy for doing it but I
had never in my life been thin not for one day even at Birth I weighed more than
average and I would do anything to be able to try on a shirt in a store and not
have to walk out of there feeling horribly embarrassed because the triple XL
wouldn't button I spent another decade dieting going to the gym regularly
counting calories and watching my weight fluctuate between 60 pounds past
clinically defined morbid obesity and 80 pounds past clinically defined morbid
obesity a new doctor eventually put me on a weight loss medication a daily
injection which works by making you so sick to your stomach that you simply
can't eat I shot myself up every day for months not taking in nearly enough food
to be considered healthy I tolerated the side effects like extreme nausea and
constant shortness of breath which was actually an allergic reaction to the
shots but I wasn't about to tell my doctor that because this was supposed to
help me lose weight this is just how toxic the need to lose weight is I was
willing to endure an allergic reaction to a very powerful drug just to try to
lose weight I lost those 20 pounds again but that was it finally I'd had enough
after my mom passed away she left me a little money so I was gonna take that
plus my own Meeker savings to have weight loss surgery specifically gastric
sleeve surgery a procedure in which they remove the majority of your stomach
shaping it into roughly the size and shape of a banana irreversible and well
known for complications like acid reflux so bad that you may need throat surgery
within a few years but I was sick of being fat I was sick of being ignored by
every man I ever found attractive I was sick of feeling like a charity case
anytime anyone I knew said that I looked good so I booked the surgery paid the
deposit booked the flight since the surgeon doing the surgery was halfway across
the country and started on the all liquid diet that leads up to the procedure
after all of that I started to ask myself am I gonna go under the knife get a
surgery with potential lifelong complications risk death on the operating table
for the approval of men who may very well be some of the biggest [ __ ] in the
world was I really doing this did I think so little of myself that the opinions
of headless torsos on Grindr could send me to a surgeon who would change the way
my body worked forever so I swallowed the cost of the deposit and I canceled the
surgery since then I've been doing research into how this happened to us how did
our entire Society become so obsessed with lean and toned or muscular bodies it
wasn't always this way so what happened the answer might seem very out of right
field the answer is capitalism and fascism [Music] Okay so capitalism is a
simple one you can easily connect the dots to how generating a sense of culture
that drives people to desperately conform to a body ideal can result in someone
making a profit but fascism that's going to take a little bit of explaining in
the culture of today I don't really like talking about fascism I have to talk
about it however because I'm learning that analyzing media in this day and age
inevitably results in hosting a discussion about fascism that's just the culture
we live in as a wise woman once said thanks I hate it but one of the
difficulties about talking about fascism and sorting media into categories of
what does or does not support neo-fascist ideology is that fascism itself is
hard to describe because a definition of fascism does not really include the way
that fascism is as much of a process of government as it is a method and a model
the history class description of fascism as communism is the far left and
fascism is the far right it's a little bit too simple even though the word
fascism comes from the Italian for bundle of sticks much like another f word it
represents a concept that is actually notoriously difficult to Define for
instance in 2013 a right-wing newspaper that had supported fascists in the past
published an article claiming that the United Kingdom independence party a
British right-wing party was fascistic however a center-left newspaper
proclaimed that compared with the Golden Dawn party in Greece who do have
fascist credentials and other Fringe parties evident in hard-hit areas of the EU
the United Kingdom independence party is pretty mild so basically centrists say
just because something Walks Like a fascist talks like a fascist and actively
says it's a fascist doesn't mean that it's really a fascist how fascist is
fascist enough to be considered fascist we seem to treat fascism like an
asymptote where there's a point where a political group May throw out any number
of flashy red flags but it's impossible to collectively label them as fascist
culturally we have decided that the Nazi party of Germany was fascist which
means that it doesn't matter how a political body May draw cues from the Third
Reich as long as it is not the Third Reich as it manifested from the late 1920s
to early 1940s in Germany it is not fascism using the Nazi party as the gold
standard of evil has consequences like this by treating them as this sacred
measure of Maximum evil we have a standard by which if something is not as bad
as the Nazis then it's fine or at least tolerable or alternatively when
something is as bad as Nazis it is taboo to acknowledge it and for that reason
we cannot discuss Rwanda or Sarajevo or any number of massacres that have
happened in the last century because it makes us uncomfortable to think that the
Nazis weren't just a one-off fluke of evil political Evolution Stalin for
instance was responsible for far more ethnic cleansing than Hitler was and a
third consequence is that we cannot treat contemporary Nazis as seriously as we
should right-wing pundits who have spent their entire careers comparing every
liberal and Democrat to Hitler have suddenly done a complete 180 we have
self-identified Nazis openly walking around with swastika armbands but the
culture does not condone violence against these Nazis because they're not the
real Nazis part of this is due to the fact that our functional definitions of
fascism are rooted in anecdotal examples of where fascists appear usually in
retrospect because as demonstrated you could call yourself a fascist while still
being ignored it really shouldn't be so surprising that's self-identification
isn't enough for us interest a re-evaluation of fascism would require us to
remove it as a method of government and more so focus on the ways that Fascist
governments enforce their ideology and the kinds of values from which fascist
ideologies emerge so often we are told what fascism is what it looks like why it
begins why it's bad in our essentialist thinking we look for those specific
markers the swastika armbands the skull and crossbones the Hugo Boss and we
don't take these markers and consider how they could be reapplied into a
contemporary context to me I think the what and why of fascism are less
important to identify than the how and the who who is fascism promoting as the
good guys who are the bad guys who should the public idolize and how does the
governing body enforce these values but these are much more abstract and
unquantifiable than listing a collective set of characteristics that manifest in
fascist States or how fascist states are eyes for instance one of the more
common assumptions about fascism is that it limits the Public's freedom of
speech and that is true the government wants to control how the public thinks so
they restrict what the public can say it makes it more difficult to spread ideas
that may not align with how the state wants the masses to think and no freedom
of speech does not apply to being able to say whatever you want on social media
just like a store manager can have you escorted off the premises for violating
profanity guidelines a private business can block what you can express on their
social media platform freedom of speech simply means the government cannot
persecute you for saying whatever you want about it with your mouth it was
designed to protect the Press so that it could accurately report about the
government in America there are no official exemptions to freedom of speech
however in Canada the Charter of Rights and Freedoms also include freedom of
speech but this Freedom does not extend to hate speech that may Target any
particular ethnic racial religious or sexual minority at least in theory by
literal definition this would mean Canada is more fascist than America in this
regard however in practice this is abundantly untrue and of course by removing
fascism from its existing definition we run the risk of over saturating it to
the rest of the world suddenly any encroachment of someone controlling your
actions becomes fascism which if you let your brain pickle in this kind of
nonsense for too long you run the risk of irreversible brain smoothing otherwise
known as libertarianism but the problem remains if everything is fascism then
nothing is fascism funny enough insofar as political movements go we can put a
soft start date on Fascism and yes this is going to lead into what body image
has to do with it I promise fascism as a coherent form started in Italy under
the leadership of Mussolini in 1919 after the infamous march on Rome and with
the help of the conservatives in 1922 he came to Power by 1925 1926 his
government had quickly become a dictatorship all of this happened after the
first world war which many Italians didn't want to join in the first place on
top of that Italy was facing a crisis because it wasn't industrializing fast
enough this led to a period of revolution known as the two red years basically a
two-year period when socialists were gaining ground in the country because of
horrendous working conditions but the fascist reaction quickly drowned out this
radical left-wing government in 1919 there were only a few true Italian fascists
however by 22 they had won the support of the rural bourgeoisie and were running
large parts of the country by the end of that same year the national fascist
party had a quarter of a million members when Mussolini's march on Rome happened
big businesses conservative politicians and the Army decided to give power to
the fascists wholesale instead of giving it to the Socialists who were far more
popular among voters this made it possible for Mussolini to become the leader of
Italy in 1922. but fascism as a way of life was just as contradictory as it was
an idea this happened because fascists in power were being pulled in three
different directions conservatives joined the party because they wanted a more
authoritarian version of the old system they wanted the pyramid scheme of
feudalist power just without the infighting brought on by the Myriad of
city-states there were also nationalists who wanted even more authoritarianism
without more violence and there were also more radical fascists who wanted a
second violent revolution Mussolini eventually sided with the most extreme
fascist Group which is something we're seeing play out in American right-wing
politics right now if you begin leaning into radicalism but you don't side with
the most radical group you become a Target the centrists have the ability to
just leave in this case the Italian conservatives but this is applicable to all
governments if the centrists leave their positions even if they can't stand the
far right that would mean giving more political power to the left also not
unlike Republican voters refusing to vote for Democratic candidates against
absolutely abhorrent Republican ones because they'd rather elect the Devil
Himself than someone who wants to protect their Medicare and Social Security
anyway basically the beginning of fascist ideology can be seen as a rejection of
the modern Progressive age inclusivity bad it became a coherent ideology of
extreme conservatism in Italy and then emerged in Germany after a period of
Crisis but was only allowed into Power after the rich permitted and facilitated
it fascism capitalism okay yes but what does that have to do with being fat
foreign [Music] there are several patterns you see in fascism when we decide to
spot it rule of one figurehead hero worship Master race purging undesirables etc
etc we've been to this Rodeo before we talk about all of these things all of the
time but if we're looking at patterns of how totalitarian regimes deploy fascism
there are some other weird patterns there's usually a focus on Art and ideals of
beauty and this is where we can arguably see fascism most clearly when the state
uses force and manipulation to consolidate the public interest around A single
standard of beauty this other major tenet to Fascism is and this was especially
true for the Nazis something we might today call Body fascism which is simply
defined as extreme views of how somebody should look especially what shape and
size they should be grinder this is present throughout all forms of fascism but
especially the ones based around the myths of Scandinavia the Nordic Superman
the area and the Ubermensch which is most of the fascism that has spurred on the
men's rights groups around North America and Western Europe even though the vast
vast majority of them do not fit the description of what they would describe as
the ideal male body which focusing so much on the ideal male body kind of sounds
pretty gay to me if you ask me granted the blonde-haired blue-eyed poster boy
for Nazi propaganda befits even a contemporary model for desirability this could
one day be you or your son your nephew the Nazi party very strongly Associated
itself and its success with physical Beauty so though the perfect male body has
been an element of fascism from the very beginning never was it more prevalent
than in Nazi Germany because Hitler was obsessed with the art of Classical
Greece to understand what I mean just watch the famous opening sequence of Lenny
riefenshaw's two-part film Olympia which documented the Berlin Olympics to a
soundtrack of dramatic music the camera pans across the ruins of the Acropolis
before lingering on several celebrated ancient sculptures offered up as ideals
of beauty and artistic prowess eventually against a misty backdrop we see one of
the most famous Greek sculptures of all a statue of a stooping naked athlete
preparing to hurl a discus its surface glistening with oil as though ready for
competition the sculpture suddenly Fades away in its place appears a living
athlete adopting the same pose slowly he starts to swivel back and forth before
hurling his discus with all his might the chilling message is presented with
Stark poetic efficiency the glories of Classical Greece are reborn in Nazi
Germany Professor Ralph Michael Schneider of the Ludwig Maximilian University
said without the classical tradition the Nazi visual ideology would have been
rather different the perfect Aryan body the white color of the marble the
beautiful ideal white male to put it very bluntly it became a kind of image of
the master race and that's what the Nazis called themselves but Olympia isn't
the only place that we see the ideal Nazi body we see in most of riefenstahl's
propaganda films to be fair slim but defined not too muscular as that would be
unsightly the ideal man was close to six feet tall clear white skin clean shaven
with little to no body hair for examples please see Calvin Klein ads the fascism
here or the fashy elements aren't the presence of a beauty standard as I
mentioned with Greece there have been very strong Beauty ideals for all of
mankind funny enough the Greek standard favored the chunkier sturdier men the
Slimmer statues Were Meant To Be associated with youth boys but where the Nazis
differed is just how specific the beauty standards were it was like you needed a
textbook to really sort out all the nuances this was mostly because Nazi
propaganda was facilitated on the myth of the Aryan race and that the Aryan race
was inherently Superior by genetic determination in order to do this the Nazis
required very strong visual indicators to demonstrate that the German man was
stronger heartier and most importantly more beautiful leaning heavily into
phrenology the now debunked study of the various elements of how the skull was
shaped being an indicator of personality traits specifically intelligence
mythologically speaking and this was part of Hitler's domestic policy the Aryans
were the descendants of the Gods specifically the Acer they prided themselves on
looking the part furthermore due to the fact that a fat German man spat in the
face of their Master race propaganda there was a precedent for punishing those
who did not conform to these standards there have been plenty of historians who
have even postulated the idea that Ernst Rome Hitler's gay BFF while he rose to
power and the man who ran the progenitor of the SS the sa was executed not
because of Hitler's anxieties or himmler's disdain for gay men but because he
was fat and therefore didn't fit the ideal image of the Aryan man which honestly
kind of checks out nor would it be the last time that the Third Reich shot
itself in the foot because something practical didn't line up with their
aesthetic philosophy if Hitler himself was a homo I think it would be starkly on
brand for him to purge the only competent member of his cabinet because no fats
no Femmes retrospectively probably for the best suffice to say with the brown
shirts out of the way Hitler had carp launched to sculpt his own hot gay boy
summer I mean secret police and the Nazis did do whatever they could to make
sure that the SS the face of the party would be a very pretty face these perfect
Nazi soldiers became a trademark of the regime across the world as the globe
suffered from malnutrition due to the food shortages of the Great Depression or
fattened up because the only food readily available was nutrient poor and
extremely high in carbs seeing these svelt attractive Germans marching down the
streets of Berlin and newsrails created an air of inferiority for many
especially in America which in no small amount contributed to the massive
signups when America joined the war remember America was attacked by Japan not
Germany but American boys across the country signed up to fight in Europe they
had to show these perfect Germans that they weren't so tough and as it turns out
they weren't and the Allies won the war and half as much time as it took America
to realize the Iraq War was a lost cause but like any time Americans go
traveling in Europe they make sure to bring home some souvenirs mostly Nazi
scientists but also they brought back body fascism you see before World War II a
lean muscular body was not idealized in fact by many it was looked down upon if
someone had a ripped toned body it meant they were a physical laborer a gardener
or construction worker someone who didn't have enough money to not have a ripped
body because physically intensive jobs were the only ones that uneducated poor
people could get in fact softer unfit bodies to a degree were considered more
attractive because it meant that person had the money to buy lots of food but
the fat had to be well distributed all around the body not just the belly
because belly fat was a sign that you probably ate a lot of cheap bread or drank
a lot of cheap beer and really skinny bodies meant that you couldn't even afford
the cheap bread so you're probably going to die soon but after World War II that
all changed [Music] suddenly being healthy wasn't a priority it was being fit
not strong fit look at Charles Atlas who for a long time was considered to have
the best body in the world today we'd probably say he has a dad bod because he'd
look fat next to the Rippling abs of Instagram models how did this come about
well soldiers coming home from World War II had seen the ridiculous bodies of
Nazi soldiers and Nazi propaganda and the mythical bodies that Nazis held up as
Perfection and thought Oh I can do better than that and so a small subsect began
trying to attain these bodies creating diet plans low in carbs high in protein
with lots and lots of exercise there was a bit of a distraction once the Cold
War started up because the enemy didn't look like the Ubermensch Soviet soldiers
were always shown bundled up in winter jackets so seeing how fit they were was
kind of hard so it had far less of an impact on the psyche of the western Army
boys but the idea of gorgeous male physiques started floating away from the
military in the decades following World War II since America was busy shipping
off anyone without flat feet to fight Wars in East Asia instead it drifted
toward the well-off the rich the bourgeoisie because your typical man wasn't
working in labor jobs anymore attaining strong muscles and ripped ABS instead
they were standing on production lines or sitting in offices growing flabby so
appearing soft was now associated with the middle class so the rich began
working out creating a market for personal trainers fancy diets and exclusive
gyms while off Housewives now wanted to look like the women on their TV sets
Farrah Fawcett or Suzanne Summers fascism sets the cultural anxiety capitalism
uses it to make a buck and then in the 1980s with the Reagan Revolution and the
popularization of commercial debt everyone felt like they could be as rich as
the carringtons or colbys so everyone started hitting the gym and fitness
centers took off as one of the most profitable businesses of the decade and it
wasn't just because people were signing up for a year-long membership on New
Year's Day and then giving up people actually went the 1980s was a decade of
excess and excessive dieting and exercise was no different one of the reasons
cocaine was so popular was because it suppressed your appetite and gave you more
energy but gay men had been way way ahead of the curve on the diet and exercise
thing we'd been hitting the gym heard since the 1950s partially because when our
gay soldiers went over to Germany and saw the sexy German soldiers we didn't
just want to beat them we wanted to be them we didn't want to be Nazis not
necessarily well we ignored the ones that did in the 1960s and 70s you were far
more likely to see gay men with defined abs and pecs than straight men it was
even considered a way for straight people to spot us if a man at the beach
looked like he lived at the gym he was probably gay because not only were we
trying to attain these bodies for ourselves but the gym was a great place to
find other people trying to attain those bodies a great place to hook up
straight men were actually worn away from going to gyms in major cities because
you never know what might happen in the locker room yeah queers and locker rooms
have been a straight scare tactic for just that long and then after the rise of
AIDS gay men wanted to look as ripped as possible so as to not appear sick since
people with AIDS especially Advanced AIDS tended to have muscle wasting we even
started using steroids because some witch doctors in New York and La started
telling gay men that steroid use would slow down the progression of the virus
and then as a community gay men just kept up with the same regimen we go to the
gym and eat crazy diets despite not having to show that we're not dying we go to
the gym despite being able to hook up just about anywhere because we still want
those perfect Nazi Soldier bodies whether we call them that or not but those
soldiers were paid and required to look like that but a switch has flipped
within the community it's no longer that we find those bodies an attractive
option and would like them for ourselves now if you don't have that body you're
worthless you're shunned you're subhuman sound familiar and we say well you
can't shame people for what they're attracted to but we do shame people who say
only whites in their grinder profile or whatever combination of disgusting
racial screening tactics they may use so why not shame those who actively
perpetuate an unhealthy body standard as I mentioned before research shows that
social demands placed upon gay men to eat healthy and achieve a perfect body are
linked to anxiety and depression and have serious mental health consequences a
gay fitness instructor told GQ Magazine working in this industry I can tell you
that looking good is not enough anymore for some gay guys they don't just want
to look good they want to look the best to illustrate his point he said he has
clients who started off doing basic bicep curls in front of the mirror but are
now competing in fitness-based competitions like Turf games and Crossfit a gay
friend said to me that it's hard to look [ __ ] these days he said and I guess
he's right there are so many fit guys out there that some guys feel the need to
step up their game in order to feel visible accepted and appreciate it if
they're not addressed queer men's body image issues can easily magnify into more
serious mental health problems severe depression among gay men has actually
increased since it's become more acceptable to be out because now that the world
sees what some gay men look like the impression becomes that all gay men must
look like that and if you don't well you better get to work this has led to the
abuse of steroids and illegal drugs to try and build muscle and satiate
appetites anorexia and bulimia and even giving up with suicide we hold up
certain body types as the goal and even the expectation for what beauty inside
the gay community is but not everyone can achieve those bodies no matter how
much they diet or work out and not just because biology sometimes works against
you like with thyroid issues and rare food sensitivities this past summer I
found out that I lacked the enzymes required to properly digest carbohydrates
which meant my body was holding on to every last carb I ate the long delayed
explanation for why I couldn't lose weight no matter how healthy I ate the
condition is called hyper rental anemia and I also have a generalized
carbohydrate intolerance it turns out it's incredibly rare and related to
diabetes surprise I have that family history and I've been warned by doctors
since my teens to be on the lookout it's not diabetes though it's just diabetes
adjacent it was one of the strangest feelings in the world after I'd been
dismissed by nearly every medical professional as just cheating on diet plans to
after three decades on this planet be informed that there is an actual reason
for it I have to try to not think about what my life would have been like if any
doctor or dietitian had decided to run the weird tests instead of just telling
me to eat less and exercise maybe the reason it's so rare is because doctors are
well they can be very quick to say that you being fat is the root of all your
health problems when in reality maybe being fat is just a symptom of the real
problem I was lucky enough to have a doctor who looked at my chart listened to
me when I told her what my diet for the last 10 years have been like that even
when I was doing the starving student thing I still lost almost nothing she
looked at my medical records and said I want to bring you in for one more test
the medical community itself is stuffed with very fat shamey sentiments only
they don't call you fat they call you unhealthy now I don't want to generalize
all doctors like this but from someone who has gotten the same shade from a lot
of them the medical community is very rooted in promoting beauty standards given
how slim their BMI charts are I'm pretty sure the overwhelming majority of
people are either overweight or obese I'm not sure which SS twink they used as a
gold standard but there is some seriously unrealistic expectations about what a
body should be how many teenagers develop Eating Disorders just because they
stepped on a scale in their doctor's office and they lean right in to meal plans
and Specialists and dietitians supplements and shakes some of the more
enterprising doctors will even have spas or wellness centers and will push their
diet subscriptions onto their patients which that isn't illegal but it sounds
like it should be we are told to trust doctors and many of us do that's a lot of
power given to someone who's trying to sell you what may very well amount to
snake oil and doctors have a very easy time diagnosing someone as fat especially
given how many tests and Hoops they make you jump through to get anything else
diagnosed it's easy for someone to make money off of fat people when the entire
culture they live in drives them into crippling anxiety and puts them under
extreme pressure to just not be fat anymore especially when the culture has a
more limited ideal of body standards not even Perfection on some of my
infrequent foyers into heterosexual social media it is plastered with
cringe-worthy declarations about what the opposite sex should be and yes it
comes from men and women because neither group really knows how the other
group's Body Works [Music] okay somebody's got to say this gay men are not alone
there are a horde of ladies out there who do think that it is perfectly
reasonable to expect men to have that Superhero body all the time in fact ten
acuerta the mcu's Namor came under a degree of criticism for not having the body
you know the one that Captain America has ironically not from the gays who
thirsted after him his nose rang and his man pearls from the get-go these were
women and straight men who were upset about his back oh well more for us at
least for the gays we have groups that tolerate a range of ways to be fit or
attractive and the more thick fellows we depict as sexually appealing in media
the more we will seek that desirability in real life conversely Warner Brothers
Executives in 2021 at least the ones who were there at the time were having a
collective meltdown leading up to the release of the Batman it turned out Robert
Pattinson was struggling to put on the bulk that Christian Bale had because they
wanted to have that shirtless Batman shot and Pattinson did look good for his
obligatory shirtless sequence but it was far from what stood out most in the
movie in my opinion I don't think the world's greatest detective and Ninja needs
to look like Brock Lesnar but back to Namor the matter of the fact is that
Neymar's body isn't really something that would feel out of place on a rugby
field it was a subverted expectation for the swimmer's body he has in the comics
which I think is perfectly okay but that said it wouldn't make sense at all for
any aquatic superhero to have dehydrated ABS the swimmer's body is for some
reason the body type that the gays and a lot of straight guys default to author
and queen Eric Shaw Quinn has said there's not enough swimming pools in Los
Angeles for all the men who say they have a swimmer's body personal trainers and
training apps get this kind of request all the time as if people think they can
just morph their body like that sorry but that in itself would be a superpower
people's bodies are the way they are and they can't control the distribution of
muscle mass or their bone structure there is a version of fit that they can
accomplish but it might not be a swimmer's body another thing that happens is
skinny guys wish they could bulk up to have a rugby build which also probably
cannot happen there's a kind of athletic determinism when it comes to Fitness we
look at swimmers and say all that swimming has given him a swimmer's body but
the truth is actually the inverse the person had the right kind of body to be
able to succeed in competitive swimming it's more accurate to say that he is a
swimmer because he has a swimmer's body this isn't always the case but in most
cases people tend to gravitate to the sport that they do because their body type
thrives in that environment whereas a thicker or chunkier guy would struggle in
the water because he's not built to accommodate fluid dynamics and the health
industry preys on this they will make these promises and they will take your
money and then another Health industry will be happy to take your money when you
get disillusioned with the first one that's how the industry is built fascism
capitalism but again some bodies aren't designed for ripped six-pack abs some
people will always be a bit bigger like me Even After figuring out after 25
years that my body really was working against me I know that once I do lose the
weight I'll never look like those Instagram models and I'll probably never live
up to the expectations of some of those headless torsos on Grindr but I'll be
able to go into a store and buy a button-up shirt that fits I'll be able to go
for a run without feeling like I'm about to have a heart attack I won't look
like what the expectation is for multiple reasons my head is too round my chest
is too broad my legs are too thick as much as it would break my teenage self's
heart I'll never be a twink and that's okay you shouldn't have to look a
specific way to meet the bare minimum body standards for this community [Music]
so I think a healthy way to move forward is to aim to be exactly that healthy as
a community that should be our goal not ripped but healthy make that the
standard for the community and that'll even take some of the pressure off of the
gym bunnies and hopefully end the epidemic of Eating Disorders the queer men
have been suffering from for decades fight back against the rising tide of body
fascism because fascists suck why would you want to look like the type of person
that Hitler thought was perfect