---
date: 2022-10-21
title: The Troubling Thirst for Jeffrey Dahmer
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "The Hunger, The Thirst (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
  - "Dahmer"
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-videos-backup"
# description: "a video essay on...?"
notes:
  - hbomb

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
{% assign tustin = site.data.cite.tustin2121 %}

<compare>
<credits class="desc">

There's always been an attraction to fictional monsters, but what happens when that monster is real?

PATREON: [link]

00:00 Introduction  
03:04 Part 1 - Framed  
11:09 Part 2 - In Frame  
20:24 Part 3 - Re-Framed  

#dahmer #KillingStalking #truecrime

</credits>
</compare>

{% include transcript-start %}

we all like True Crime if the glut of True Crime series is any indication it's
very suddenly become one of the most engaging forms of contemporary
entertainment and there's no sign of it stopping from streaming to YouTube to
networks to podcasts it seems the genre has yet to find its saturation point in
2022 True Crime shows are among Netflix's most watched and the number of True
Crime shows on Netflix is rapidly growing between July of 2020 and March of 2021
the service launched 18 such series with around 40 original shows currently
available to watch on their true crime page since the release of into the deep
and other popular documentaries on the service in recent years such as don't
cats making a murderer and Tiger King Netflix has become particularly associated
with the genre while True Crime shows were once favored by older audiences with
shows like Dateline and 2020 targeting those demographics specifically they're
now becoming increasingly popular among people my age and younger and they raise
a number of ethical questions particularly for a streaming service like Netflix
the true crime series you put on to help you go to sleep at night it's about a
real person often who have surviving relatives who don't consider their deceased
loved ones murder to be very relaxing though we may know better we devour every
serving of this genre that is provided to us in no small measure by Netflix in
September of 2022 Ryan Murphy and Ian Brennan released monster the Jeffrey
Dahmer story starring Evan Peters as the titular serial killer over 196 million
hours of the show were watched in the first week alone making it the most
popular show on the streaming service at the time of release furthermore just
like Joe Exotic the Tiger King Dahmer has received a great deal of publicity for
all the wrong reasons [Music] foreign [Music] despite Netflix's claims that the
series will give notorious serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer's victims a voice the
show received harsh criticism for its portrayal of the victims upon its debut
with several of the victims loved ones speaking out saying Netflix didn't even
involve them in the process others have said that by hiring American Horror
Stories Evan Peters the object of many a girls and gay boys affection the show
has glamorized Dahmer himself after the Netflix series premiered and Peter's
portrayal of the character went viral the actual glasses that Dahmer wore in
prison were auctioned off for a hundred and fifty thousand dollars we've
romanced the serial killer for a long time mads Mickelson's portrayal of
Hannibal Lecter and the criminally canceled show Hannibal is a great example of
this Thomas Harris's bread and butter character is fictional and not only
fictional but such a carnivalesque mix of sophistication intellect and brutality
that I couldn't really say it passes for realistic Hannibal lacks the quiet
chaos that real-life serial killers possess though Dahmer was also a cannibal
serial killer he lacked the eat the rude principles that Hannibal Lecter lived
by hardly a principled serial killer himself Dahmer lacked lectures discipline
to stop at just cannibalism and also engaged in necrophilia and pedophilia but
the major difference between the two is that Hannibal lecter's victims are all
as fictional as he is and so are the families of his victims that is not the
case for Dahmer's victims it can be a lot to deal with seeing the man who
murdered your son and her brother be glorified on billboards and ads on YouTube
imagine getting that jump scare when you're looking up a cake decorating
tutorial navigating the ethics of True Crime content is tricky there is a fine
line drawn between real life procedural cop dramas and celebrating the infamous
critics have begun to question the need for entertainment mediums which
fetishize or even sexualize serial killers in the last three years alone we've
seen multiple films about Ted Bundy with two of them coming from Netflix one of
them starring Zac Efron a whole new generation of girls fell head over heels for
the infamous killer which was a grim remake in itself of the real-life Ted Bundy
trial he had fangirls defending him in the press and even begging to marry him
after the release of the Zac Efron movie extremely Wicked shockingly evil and
vile Netflix's social media team actually begged viewers to stop standing Bundy
but unlike Bundy nobody ever thirsted for Jeffrey Dahmer when he was on trial or
in prison at least not as publicly as with Bundy but that seems to have changed
now there is a thirst for Dahmer made apparent on Tick Tock and Twitter with
hordes of white women droning over how attractive he is because the message we
need to send is that violent crime can turn a five into an 11. again both Bundy
and Dahmer were serial killers who tortured and murdered dozens of people whose
families are still alive and can see these tweets and posts on Tick Tock the
Dahmer tag on Tick Tock now has more than one billion views with users posting
videos expressing lust and even Sympathy for the killer others have re-edited
scenes from the series to resemble a romantic comedy with many users commenting
that they were rooting for Dahmer and at least one victim to live happily ever
after oh God that sounds familiar foreign of 2021 I released a video looking at
the controversial Korean manwa killing stalking the story of a young man who is
abducted by a maniacal serial killer and over the course of the series Falls
madly in love with him the series ends with them both presumed dead the audience
for killing stalking seemed to be split between people who enjoy dark complex
horror stories me and teenage girls who were rooting for Yoon bum and his captor
osun Wu to come out of it as a happy couple because if you talk to a social
worker working out your problems with a violent abuser and finding some common
ground is absolutely not the objective I wasn't Disturbed that people
romanticized a fictional serial killer like I said Hannibal Lecter has been
romanticized even by his own Creator granted fanables were a little bit more
measured in their shipping of Will Graham and Hannibal Lecter a ship name
referred to as hanogram instances of Will and Hannibal as a happy couple were
usually depicted in alternate realities where they could be together fans
recognized that this was impossible in the canonical world the characters lived
in but the chemistry was so intense in AU for them had to be created this Nuance
did not does not seem to be present in much of the killing stalking fandom where
the fervor for the violent deranged serial killer osongwoo was almost
exclusively derived from how sexy he looked so should I be surprised that there
is a visceral thirst for Dahmer coming from the same age group no am I shocked
anyway yes shocked and disappointed and grossed out and uncomfortable because
unlike Hannibal Lecter or osongwoo Jeffrey Dahmer was a real person and his
victims were real people with real friends and real families who grieved for the
loss of their loved ones who were already going through a rough time seeing the
story of their murders brought back to light by a major Netflix series and now
have to deal with a sizable portion of the internet talking about how cute or
handsome Jeffrey Dahmer was and how he deserved a break because they get him
Honeys among other things he wanted sex slaves sex slaves and not in a fun
consensual Kink kind of a way he enjoyed conducting chemical lobotomies to get
what he wanted is there really a I can change him mentality to approaching these
serial killers that all he needs is the right person to change that killing
people and the other stuff is just a little Quirk that you can iron out I know
women who have been trying to get their men to wash their beard trimmings out of
the bathroom sink for years with no luck I don't know where you think you're
gonna get with stop being a psycho the True Crime genre has rightly received its
fair share of criticism for turning gruesome crimes into entertainment at the
expense of the well-being of survivors and perhaps there needs to be real action
taken to address that however this delusional wave of people announcing that
they are not disturbed by Dahmer's crimes feels like a whole new level of
desensitization they even say that the things we see him doing in the series
really aren't that bad Dahmer is just a little boy with doe eyes misunderstood
by everyone but them they're not like other girls they can handle a 14 year old
boy getting dismembered is this a problem with media itself has the American pop
culture fiction cycle pushed the role of the main character to be something
warranting empathy and understanding without exception among the tropes
structures and sensibilities of American fiction is it just automatically taken
for granted that the main character is an empathizable figure whose role through
any despicable actions is ultimately Redemption one of the parts of this odd
phenomenon that I've noticed is that while girls of a certain age are acting
like Jeffrey Dahmer was Harry Styles not everyone is lining up with them and by
everyone I mean the gays you know his victims wigays are notorious for thirsting
over guys we really shouldn't and also for being obsessed with True Crime but
this seems to be one of the few exceptions and for good reason gay men have been
living under the shadow of Jeffrey Dahmer for as long as I've been alive as the
AIDS crisis was running rampant in the community was only just starting to
receive any large-scale sympathy from the hetero majority up Pops the news of
this gay male serial killer who isn't just killing his victims but zombifying
them eating them and melting their bodies in Vats of acid he was a harsh example
of what straight people always said we were that we were deviants and monsters
never to be trusted and he was the perfect poster child for this a nearly
unparalleled monster nobody talked about the fact that the reason he got away
with his crimes for so long was because he was targeting gay men especially men
of color two groups the police notoriously couldn't give two shits about helping
people only talked about the cannibal queer and how certainly he wouldn't be the
last to rise up to this prominence the most disturbing aspect is how he was able
to carry on his career for as long as he did by picking gay men of color he was
able to escape the scrutiny of law enforcement Dahmer for this reason is an
uncomfortable reminder not only of violence against the community but that
members of the community can be a horrible detriment to our reputation and a
reminder that not very long ago we weren't worth the Law's time that we were
nobodies to everybody and it didn't matter how loud we screamed the world had us
on mute and in many sections of the United States this fear of gay men never
went away even today these people are influenced by Dahmer when they fight
against gay rights they associate his heinous crimes with others in the queer
community because if one of us could be a monster that means we all could be
after the discovery of Dahmer's crimes there was a rash of hate crimes against
gay men across the United States with vigilante mobs out to make sure that the
next Jeffrey Dahmer the next Monster queer wouldn't get a chance to find his
victims and so the queer Community especially gay men have lived with Dahmer
Specter for three decades so you'd be hard-pressed to find a lot of gay men
thirsting over the killer online Evan Peters yes we've been drooling over him
since he first showed up in American Horror Story but not the actual Jeffrey
Dahmer and not Evan peters's portrayal of Jeffrey Dahmer in fact there was a
huge pushback when the series was released because it was tagged as lgbtq on
Netflix presumably because of Dahmer's own sexuality and the sexualities of his
victims but while the queer Community fights back against A Renewed push to
remove our rights do we want people seeing lgbtq tagged to Jeffrey [ __ ] Dahmer
when they're browsing Netflix no and so the community in a rare moment of
agreement demanded Netflix remove the tag and they did which considering
Netflix's pig-headedness when it comes to defending transphobic comedians on
their platform kind of shocked me they're not exactly well known for doing what
the queer Community asks of them these days they probably had the wherewithal to
realize that Dahmer's existence as a serial killer was due in large part to
homophobia and racism so they didn't want to stick their hand into that
particular Hornet's Nest this is a telling that at least doesn't completely
ignore Dahmer's effect on the gay black community they've had to dodge a lot of
queer-related controversies this year this is among one of the easier ones to
resolve typical accounts of his murder spree usually Overlook the fact the queer
communities of color were easy targets for Dahmer due to long-standing patterns
of police violence and especially indifference in major cities across the
Midwest similar to what happened in many cities after World War II Milwaukee
where Dahmer committed the majority of his murders saw an increase in the
visibility of its gay community nearly a thousand gay men called Milwaukee home
according to a study conducted by the city's influential crime prevention body
the Metropolitan Commission on crime prevention during the war as words spread
about them more arrests and convictions were made in the city during this time
the city's black population also grew as a result of the Second Great Migration
an exodus of African Americans from the south spurred by The increased demand
for manufacturing Goods during the second world war Milwaukee cops happily
targeted these new growing communities as well in spite of the fact that they
were directly contributing to the war effort the media also played a role in the
criminalization of City residents who were seen as leading immoral Lifestyles
the Milwaukee journal's editorials from the 1940s frequently used terms like
slaves of lust and Menace of sex perverts to describe the emerging gay community
it also supported the Metropolitan Commission on crime prevention's 1946 sexual
psychopath law which would have institutionalized overt homosexuals until their
deviant Behavior was cured or otherwise otherwise meaning dead to defuse the
threat of a growing minority presence these sexual psychopath laws were
introduced and passed in places like Milwaukee as the gay community grew in
prominence and as more African-Americans relocated there black people were not
safe from these sexual psychopath laws because as far as police were concerned
interracial relationships were just as bad as gay ones because of the city's
changing demographics Milwaukee's police department created new units to better
defend white straight residents from black and other minority groups in the
1960s the fifth Police District in the city's predominantly black North Side had
four and a half times as many officers as the adjacent majority white District
this kind of Terror against black Milwaukee residents created a culture of fear
and distrust between the police and black and queer people who often hesitated
to report crimes committed against them which helps explain how someone like
Dahmer could go relatively unnoticed or unpunished for so long plus a municipal
statute from 1911 called the freeloader Clause barred people who did not own
property from filing complaints against the police with the fire and police
commission so many black renters assumed their cries for help would fall on deaf
ears these long histories of anti-black and anti-queer violence created in an
environment where Dahmer could murder 17 black indigenous Asian Latino and gay
men and boys with little pushback many were particularly susceptible to Dahmer
and his tactics because of Decades of the city's structured racism and
homophobia today we know that there were many instances in which the police
could have intervened but did not in one instance officers John A balserzak and
Joseph gabrish had the opportunity to rescue a disoriented unclothed and
bleeding 14 year old boy from Dahmer however they took the killer at his word
that the child was actually 19 and just drunk no probing no investigation
although balser Zach and gabrish were eventually fired for their actions they
were reinstated with back pay in 1994. balserzak had a long career in the police
department serving as president of the Milwaukee Police Association from 2005 to
2009 before retiring in 2017. 2017 five years ago and people question why Pride
organizations don't want police officers to participate in uniform over the
years and the many retellings of the Dahmer story his victims have been
described as Street urchins drug addicts and people not unfamiliar with their
own brushes with the law as if that should justify the heinous things done to
them creating a sense that they were far from innocent victims allows most
people to look at the crime spree as the actions of one queer psychopath if he
only targets people who have it coming then there's no cause for concern if you
live by the straight and narrow regardless of how this betrays malice and
laziness on the police force culminating in decades of police abuse and neglect
how many other people disappear because the police don't think they're worth
their time how many that we never ever hear about it was almost a Trope in the
gay Villages of big cities young gay men and trans people just going missing and
no one investigating it many hoped they'd just packed up and moved home but most
knew it was never something quite so innocent talk to the elders in your local
queer community they remember but even with all of this knowledge of neglect
heartbreak disappearances lost and destroyed lives all of it freely available to
anyone who can type Google into an internet browser The Thirst for Dahmer is
real despite his cannibalism despite the decades-long Erasure of his victims
these women and mostly teenage girls are swooning over him and why not to our
knowledge Dahmer never killed any teenage girls or any women at all so there's a
level of disconnection just like with killing stalking would the teenage fans of
killing stalking be so in love with osun Wu if they were watching him spend each
issue horrifically torturing and murdering a woman he kills women in the series
multiple in fact but they're barely Side characters Yoon bum is the main event
and in my opinion because Yoon bum is a man female readers are able to take in a
horror story without facing the true horror of it because unfortunately to this
day many women still see gay men as nothing more than a fancy accessory
especially teenage girls who lust for the perfect gay best friend a boy whose
sex life is secret so you never have to hear about it but he's always there to
tell you if your boyfriend's being a jerk gay men and boys as a purse or a fancy
iPhone case something to show off but ultimately something disposable and we get
an extra layer of that with Dahmer's victims since the vast majority of them
were not white but the vast majority of Dahmer's thirsters online are a white
there's further license for disconnection they get to look at them even less
like people than if they were white gay men it's telling that the person fans
ship Dahmer with the most is Stephen Hicks his first and whitest victim and
while I am far from opposed to queer villains in media I do wonder how smart it
is to drop this story onto such a large platform when the gay community is
already seeing an increase in hate crimes and anti-gay laws across the United
States the media's initial reporting on the Dahmer case was entangled in a
subtle but pervasive homophobic logic even as it denied having any such effect
lesbian and gay activists in Milwaukee and elsewhere protested strongly against
initial references to the Dahmer murders as homosexual Overkill by public
officials and the mainstream press arguing that Dahmer's actions were no more
representative of the homosexual Community than the killings of a heterosexual
serial killer would be representative of the heterosexual Community thus the
term homosexual Overkill served to normalize heterosexuality even heterosexual
serial killers while pathologizing homosexuality the media is surprisingly
responded quickly to the protests and the phrase homosexual Overkill was quickly
removed from coverage of the case in fact it appears that the media became so
concerned that their reports not appear homophobic that they largely dropped any
mention of Dahmer's sexual orientation even at Dahmer's trial his sexual
orientation barely registered as an issue those who advocated for gay
assimilation praised this development according to this line of thinking
bringing up Dahmer sexuality and media coverage of the murders was inappropriate
because it had nothing to do with why he became a serial killer but if Dahmer's
sexual orientation could not be mentioned neither could institutional homophobia
which was a problem given the overwhelming evidence that Dahmer had internalized
societal homophobia to such an extent that he felt guilt shame discomfort and
hatred about his own homosexuality a logical though extreme result of these
feelings could have been the urge to kill those to whom he was sexually
attracted in a Twisted way I could perhaps understand how someone would think
that having male zombies for sex and sex only would separate him from all the
other trappings of the gay lifestyle however with his sexuality out of the
question society would have to take no blame for the killings the few reporters
who did discuss homophobia and Dahmer's gayness mostly in LGBT magazines tended
to ignore the fact that Dahmer was white the reluctance to discuss interracial
sex in light of the Dahmer murders can be interpreted as a sign of Shame and
fear of having one's sexual orientation linked to racism or both according to
several of Dahmer's acquaintances he displayed a deep-seated bigotry toward
African Americans and made racist comments about black gay men in particular
while authorities and the media learned to avoid making over references to
Dahmer sexual orientation in their official portrayals of him Dahmer himself
made use of what we might call gay rights strategies as his career as a serial
killer gained momentum these actions along with the media's delayed coverage of
Dahmer sexual orientation highlights the inadequacies and potential social
hazards of the neoliberal gay rights rhetoric he used his gayness to his
Advantage when convicted of sexual assault in the enticing of a child for
immoral purposes in 1989 he came out to the judge afterwards the judge sentenced
him to five years probation and one year in the House of Corrections with work
release permitted in order so that he wouldn't lose his job at this point he had
already killed five people he would kill 12 more before finally being caught and
convicted in 1978 he had killed Stephen Mark Hicks an 18 year old by Dahmer's
admission he was bludgeoned with a dumbbell and strangled to death before being
dismembered remains were pulverized and Scattered behind Dahmer's childhood home
in 1987 he killed Stephen Walter Toomey his body was dismembered in the basement
of Dahmer's grandmother's house and the remains discarded in the trash in 1988
he killed two men James Edward Duck's daughter a 14 year old and Richard
Guerrero in 1989 he killed Anthony Lee Sears after the murder Dahmer preserved
his skull and genitals in a filing cabinet in 1990 he killed Raymond Lamont
Smith Edward Warren Smith Ernest Marquez Miller and David Courtney Thomas on
September 24th in 1991 he killed Curtis Strader Errol Lindsay on April 7th Tony
Hughes on May 24th Conor accent the same phone on May 27th Matt Turner on June
30th Jeremiah Weinberger on July 5th Oliver Lacy on July 15 Joseph bradhoft on
July 19th and then was finally arrested on July 23rd does this sound like the
man anyone let alone teenage girls should be lusting over having a thing for
serial killers isn't new and it hasn't risen up just because of shows on Netflix
there are several online communities such as blogs and message boards where fans
of serial killers like Bundy and Dahmer and Richard Ramirez and others expressed
their adoration for these individuals as if they may be a pop star however as
evidenced by the statements made by the families of Dahmer's victims and the
show's proclivity for trying to understand the killer rather than to tell the
stories of his victims simply because the killer was a moderately attractive
white man maybe adaptations of these stories can arguably create more harm than
good this is much worse than the situation with killing stalking because
although The Thirst was and is real for osongwoo he like Hannibal Lecter before
him was a fictional character who never actually hurt anyone the creation of an
artist is a commentary on our willingness to forgive nearly anything if someone
is attractive but Dahmer was real and his victims were real and the pain their
families suffered still is very much real so maybe the next time a producer
green lights a movie or streaming series about a notorious serial killer perhaps
they should refrain from playing armchair psychologist pretending that their
movies or series can give some new insight into the killer that hasn't already
been gleamed by criminal psychiatrists long before now and instead focus on the
people whose lives they took they are the people we really ought to remember
foreign [Music] foreign [Music] thank you [Music] thank you