---
date: 2020-10-04
title: "Deep Cuts: Society and Queer Horror"
status: In Progress
aka: !!seq
topics: !!seq
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-public-records/Society+and+Queer+Horror.mp4"
description: "a video essay on <xyz>."
notes: 
  - hbomb
  - dec2-delete

contributors:
  downloaded: "Alyx from the Hbombergy Discord"
  formatting: "Tustin2121"

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---

<compare>
<credits class="opening">

\[Dramatic hallways]

> James Somerton  
presents

> Based on  
the works of

> Amanda Kohr

> Darren Elliott

> Alejandra Gonzalez

> Colin Arason

> Zoe Fortier

> David Church

> David Greven

> Claire Sisco King  
Amanda Howell

> And  
Alex London

> DEEP CUTS  
Society and Queer Horror

</credits>
</compare>
{% assign timecode = "1:14" %}

[Fade up on video]

<compare>
<james {% include timecode %}>

Mankind has always found an innate horror in things that are different. An evolutionary reflex to protect itself from the things that may be dangerous to them or their loved ones. Eons ago, human beings found Homo Erectus to be terrifying, because it was different. Leading to their assumed extinction.

This is not entirely unlike the reaction toward homosexuality from the heterosexual majority. Something different. Something strange. Something queer. Something that goes against what they believe to be the natural order of things. And that in and of itself is the initial seed of horror. Being afraid of things you do not understand, things that do not belong, creatures and events that go against your own survival needs. A son or daughter that bears no children could possibly lead to the end of your lineage. And what else do you exist for other than to procreate? 
{% assign timecode = "2:15" %}

</james>
<from></from>
</compare>

<compare>
<james {% include timecode %}>

In the days and years before the rise of Mesopotamia, Egypt, Greece, Rome, what was there to civilization but creating the next generation of people? And homosexuals both men and women *could* (theoretically) put a stop to that. And so it can be assumed that from the very beginning of time homosexuality was looked at as not just a societal other... but a danger to mankind itself.

Though like many things existing before the written word, this proved to be untrue, this idea (along with other fanciful creations of pre-history) has survived into the modern age. The notion of homosexuality as a danger to mankind as a whole has been disproven time and time again. But sometimes ancient teachings are hard to be forgotten. 

And so the queer entered into the horror canon. Centuries before hollywood even existed, before horror movies graced the silver screen, before the works of Bram Stoker and Mary Shelley sent chills down reader spines... before the people of Salem burned those accused of being witches alive. Before even the murder of Saint Sebastian.
{% assign timecode = "3:35" %}

</james>
<from></from>
</compare>

<compare>
<james {% include timecode %}>

The fear of the unknown, according to the American Psychological Association, is one of the most prominent causes for anxiety among people in both the first and third world. It accounts for the hatred toward anything existing outside the norm. In bathroom laws across the United States, in the banning of immigrants, in the murder of non-white people, in the remaining animosity toward homosexuals, and anyone looked at as queer.

</james>
<from></from>
</compare>

<compare>
<james {% include timecode %}>

But this was not always the case. For millennia, homosexuality and gender fluidity were not things to fear, but things to embrace, if not celebrate. Egypt had gay and lesbian and (by all accounts) transgender pharaohs and queens. Mesopotamia had gay kings. Most of the ancient Greek philosophers were gay or bisexual. Rome had gay emperors and senators. Even early Christianity was more or less accepting of gay men.

But that didn't last.

Along with the dark ages came a great tumult that led to the fear of anything and anyone non-Christian. Women became witches, gay men became warlocks, and the very idea of homosexuality was attributed to demonic possession, if not from Satan himself, than from the pagan deities that lingered and swept down from the north.

And that is where our story of gay horror picks up. Hundreds of years later, with a coven of witches.
{% assign timecode = "5:14" %}

</james>
<from></from>
</compare>

## Sisters of Salem

<compare>
<james {% include timecode %}>

*The Craft*, released in 1996, holds an odd appeal within the lgbt community. There are no queer characters but... the coding...

The film follows the story of four teenage girls who each grow up feeling different, in one way or another. Special and above the fray of their peers, or rejected by them entirely, as so many queer teens have experienced. Either being praised for their artistic prowess in theater, art, or dance, or roundly rejected by the populace at large for being different.
{% assign timecode = "5:55" %}

</james>
<from></from>
</compare>






By happenstance the four girls end up in the same school and find each other essentially by cruising the hallways sideways looks and quiet nods to each other lead to
hookup which for them is going shopping for candles after school the most memorable character by all accounts is nancy
and she's already out as a witch openly practicing the craft she wears goth lipstick and black laced up stevie nicks
boots she has a sexual history and a noose hanging in her locker bonnie is a girl with self-image issues due to scars
that cover her arms and back like so many queer kids she just wants to be left alone yet she fears that in the end
that's exactly the thing that will happen that she'll grow up lonely never finding love rochelle the only black
character faces racist comments from the other students angering her but only insofar as pouting about what they did to
her cashmere sweater this isn't a movie about racism after all it's about wikiphobia and finally sarah the main
character isn't sure about her identity at all in the beginning she starts out craft curious this is her journey she's
confronted with peer pressure and her own internalized wichiphobia back at school the next day she doesn't want to be
rejected by the popular kids so she downplays her relationship with nancy bonnie and rochelle chris your typical teenage
movie football jock persists in making bullying comments about the three spiritual deviants who he calls the [ __ ] of
eastwick because he's just so clever after the four witches have confirmed each other's witchy tendencies the four take
a bus to the witchy part of town where a young person can go and be themselves a safe space with no anti-witch judgment
in the movie the neighborhood seems to be an empty grassy field but to many a queer youth watching it in 1996 it was the
castro district of san francisco chelsea in new york or church street in toronto whether a place safe for witches or
gays the bus driver knows exactly where he's going to take them warning them gay icon confirmed what follows are
multiple scenes resembling radical queer fairy gatherings where they call the corners and chant hail to the guardians
they also perform a ceremony that might someday constitute polyamorous marriage later the girls hold a body electric
workshop where they play light as a feather stiff as a board empowered by their chosen family the girls inadvertently
start causing their revenge fantasies to come true these revenge scenarios are framed in classic locations of gay teen
drama the white racist begins losing her blonde hair while showering in the gym locker room the football jock falls in
love with one of the witches and is then driven crazy when the love is unrequited sadly the film's narrative wraps up as
witchcraft backfires on the girls thereby illustrating the dangers of non-conformity the girls survive only by vowing to
never practice the craft again they all end up back in the closet except one who ends up in a straitjacket being
released the same year the defensive marriage act was put in place and only two years after the don't ask don't tell
policy was passed the craft became an instant hit an occult sensation that would be played at gay halloween parties for
literally decades to come as mentioned before the connection between witches and homosexuality has gone back centuries
if not millennia lesbians were accused of witchcraft more than any other group of women and gay men were regularly
accused of being warlocks or simply possessed by satan it's always funny really that the christian right wing believes
that god's main adversary is so interested in us we should take it as a compliment really in modern wicca homosexuality
is highly embraced although heteronormativity was a strict rule among wiccans in the early to mid 20th century newer
wiccan traditions often avoid or disregard the historical aversion to lgbt people these new traditions often cite the
charge of the goddess which states all acts of love and pleasure are my rituals many queer christians have found that
the teachings of the church led them down the path of wicca and witchcraft witchcraft on the other hand offered a
spiritual space where queer people could step into their personal power and explore otherness without shame guilt or
fear though most self-identified witches begin dabbling in magic at a young age it's not until after puberty that it
becomes a real draw for them furthermore the idea of a coven creates a space for community a spiritual place where one
can be themselves without the ever-present evangelical eye though many would suspect that modern witches grew up in
ultra-liberal hippie-esque environments today over 80 percent of self-identified witches grew up in right-wing christian
homes an environment that seems rife for creating things that are very unchristian based on the best-selling novel by
queer ally stephen king carrie tells the story of kerry white teenage girl trying desperately to make it through her
high school years she's bullied for being a bit different for being shy for not fitting in and like many young
christians doesn't feel at home in the stifling environment of an evangelical household possibly the most obvious queer
coding in the story is when carrie's ultra religious mother actually locks her in a closet declaring that she'll be sent
to hell and punished for being who she is if she continues down this sinful path carrie has a crush you see on the high
school heartthrob tommy and like many a gay boy and girl in their high school years he is completely unattainable until
he's not until he's suddenly interested in carrie a predicament both thrilling and terrifying how many queer high
schoolers have been in that position having a crush on a boy or girl thinking there's no way that they could possibly be
into you that they're most likely straight approaching them romantically may even end in violence especially in the
1970s when the book and movie came out this can easily be placed on most high schoolers who feel like they don't fit in
but it's particularly salient for queer kids i myself had a crush in junior high we'll call him dan he knew i was gay
and seemed relatively accepting but the ever-existing caveat but i'm not gay so you know don't try anything always
hovered over the friendship i knew there was no chance and then one night my friends and i were having a movie night six
of us were piled into my room watching bram stoker's dracula itself full of queer imagery and while most everyone had
spread out around the room dan and i ended up in my bed a single bed with barely enough room for me let alone another
six foot soccer player he didn't seem to mind though nothing happened between us of course but knowing that my straight
best friend was okay practically cuddling with me made me pretty happy no such luck for carrie white though or most
queer kids after much bullying even by characters not coded strictly as villains carrie is invited to the prom the
epitome of high school heteronormativity not just invited but invited by the most all-american crush she could possibly
have the epitome of the high school crush archetype not of his own volition mind you but by the cajoling of his
girlfriend sue who seems to be the only decent person in the entire school but carrie doesn't know that she gets to
believe for just a little while that a boy like that could really like her and to make it all that much better the rabid
[ __ ] who's been making her high school life a living hell won't even be there thanks to the help of a coded lesbian
gym teacher eventually voted prom queen carries on top of the world and then the rug is pulled out from under her a
bucket of pig's blood is pulled from the rafters coating her head to toe and suddenly the realization hits the fear that
every queer kid holds down deep inside that they'll be accepted lauded even just for it all to be one big practical joke
pranks like these are not uncommon there's a reason every outsider in high school fears them pig's blood usually isn't
involved but raising up an oddball student to the very highest of heights just to push them off at the edge it does
happen this is when most would run off the stage in horror and shame hide from the people who did this but not carrie
not unlike the videos we see of high school kids fighting back against their bullies carrie strikes back in a vicious
and bloody attack that leaves the prom coded in even more blood than she fires rage around the gymnasium as she makes
her way through it a revenge fantasy for every teenager who has ever been othered made fun of bullied attacked held down
carries a horror to mainstream audiences terrified of the other but a hero to queer kids and everyone who doesn't fit in
a literal horror superhero director of the 2013 remake lesbian director kimberly pierce said i think another queer part
of the narrative is that carrie gets superpowers and those superpowers are like a queer person understanding that they
have a talent or a queer person finally coming to terms with their gender identity or sexual preference and saying even
if this is not the mainstream it's okay because that's literally what carrie says she says to her mom there are other
people out there like me i am normal i am okay even if you don't think so i've talked to a lot of gay people and they
love the revenge tale love that carrie gets even they love that she goes after the people that did this to her it's an
echo of what a queer person could write as a kind of corrective narrative given carrie's status as a cultural icon her
simultaneous status as horror film victim and monster alongside the narrative concerning her burgeoning sexuality and
attraction to boys she may well be situated as a powerful figure of identification for gay male viewers kerry's
narrative can also be read as a variation on the coming out tale both sexually and socially and revolves around the
awkwardness of revealing one's own sexuality to one's parents especially one's mother and the guilt or shame involved in
doing so the film also has both cult and camp lure mainly from its use of excess a staple of director brian de palma in
the excessive style and form of his direction in terms of lighting color coding and the melodramatic use of music and
score of course in the end from my point of view anyway kerry is all about shame much like the shame of gay teenagers
and certain types of families certain kinds of home towns not fitting in being ostracized even when you try to fit in
and this shame is personified by carrie white gay audiences form a connection with carrie unlike with most horror
heroines she is the internalized anxiety within us the yearning to be something more to fit in and yet be ourselves to
not be bullied or at least to fight back against the bully but we're not all carrie white sometimes that self-hatred
internalizes something dark and morbid roiling within our bodies a demon ravaging our very soul demons are not just
beings of pain and torment and clive barker's hellraiser they're moral abominations creatures so lost in hedonism
they've long since forgotten the difference between pain and pleasure demons that could be mistaken or even accepted for
angels from a certain point of view though many would question the queerness of hellraiser it lurches well beyond
breaking heteronormativity it skins it alive written and directed by clive barker and based on his novella the
hell-bound heart hellraiser tells the story of frank cotton a man who has broken every imaginable sexual taboo who has
crossed every human limit and has still not met his fill of sexual sadism bdsm has become all too vanilla for him and so
he searches out an infernal puzzle box that when solved summons interdimensional beings known as the cenobites creatures
that dwell in a realm of extreme kernel indulgence where people are willingly subjected to severe forms of sadomasochism
that include but are surely not limited to being torn apart by hooks and chains clearly this amalgamation of pleasure
and pain is extremely hyperbolized for the sake of horror but it doesn't feel too far off from the way queer people in
the bdsm community are often perceived by those who don't understand that subculture that's the key variable that makes
hellraiser so special parker is entirely aware of heteronormative insecurities such as versions of polyamory involving
frank and his mistress julia barker takes these insecurities and combines them with imagery derived from the underground
leather scene of the time mixed with the art of herronius bach in order to create a film about the broad spectrum of
sensuality and sexuality he shocked audiences with its subversive but wildly inclusive material even more important is
the fact that clive barker created this story as a gay man which allows queer representation to transcend the page and
screen making hellraiser resonate even more profoundly having always been interested in monsters it could be safe to
assume that barker was fascinated by outsiders and outcasts like his creations because he could relate to them and he
wasn't alone the queer bdsm culture of the time welcomed hellraiser with open arms indulging in its allegorical betrayal
of kink polyamory and queerness this subgroup of the lgbt community grew quickly in the 1980s as a way to experience
sexual pleasure that didn't involve penile penetration avoiding hiv by learning a whole new way of enjoying pleasure and
pain and to many in the queer community they were looked at as freaks monsters horrors to be avoided at any cost what
does it mean to be considered a monster by monsters even in harry and benshoff's book monsters in the closet which
you'll no doubt notice shares a title with this video's spiritual predecessor barker's work remains somewhat marginal
benchoff recognizes hellraiser for some of its visual characteristics but comes to the conclusion that too often the
representation of barker's monster queers seems similar to those produced by right-wing ideologues benshoff's book
borrows many theories put forward by robin wood in the late 1970s in a series of essays would examine the ways in which
horror films reflect repression in contemporary society this study attempts to shine a light on the shapes that lurk in
the shadows and the way that the introduction of the monster disrupts society according to wood the basic formula of the
horror film is that normality is threatened by the monster one of the controversial aspects of wood's article is the
distinction that he makes between what he perceives to be progressive and reactionary reprehensible movements within the
genre this notion of reprehensible horror continues to be a presence in monsters in the closet and it would appear that
this attitude contributes greatly to ben schaff's general disdain for barker's work while there is merit to the
criticism that there is a lack of positive queer representation in hellraiser the logic applied by both wood and
benshoff remains deeply problematic their argument revolves around the notion that films like hellraiser want us to
reject the sights we see as being repugnant or negative when the reality is that barker finds these images to be
compelling and horror film audiences are more likely to be fascinated than disgusted even if one accepts that the queer
images and hellraiser are not positive ones how does that make these representations reprehensible to a large extent the
queers in hellraiser belong to a pantheon of hyperbolically monstrous gay characters of the likes of which populate the
films of john waters in his analysis of character construction and gay narrative film tom wah points out the
irresistible attraction by gay authors to images that seem harmful in the viewfinders of movement ideologues that
accepting the fact that a bdsm subculture exists within the queer community further others us from the heteronormative
white picket fences of the suburbs and what is a queer person if they're not accepted by the suburban rabble a monster
of course but there's an odd attractiveness to the monsters of hellraiser when they move and speak there's a certain
degree of attractive nobility in their appearance these debauched angels may commit visceral acts of savagery but they
also possess a surprising grace and eloquence while benshoff may view these creatures as monster queers that are not at
all positive representations of the community it must needs be remarked that the cenobites and hellraiser fit more
comfortably into the role of anti-hero than that of the monster when our protagonist kirstie is confronted by the
cenobites after solving the puzzle box herself and demands to know who they are she is met with the reply explorers in
the further regions of experience demons to some angels to others introduction implies that their prey chooses them not
the other way around if one assumes that their typical victim is someone like frank then it becomes apparent that their
talents are actively sought out by hedonists who are looking for new experiences when they encounter an innocent the
cenobites unlike other slashers can be reasoned with their appearance may mark them as outsiders but they pose no
serious threat to normal people who wish to remain normal just like any good master or dom they don't want you if you
don't want them if the cenobites are not truly the monster then what is it would appear that the film's real monster
queer is frank the undead beast the cenobites unwittingly leave behind he is the one that truly threatens normality when
he returns to earth to resurrect his long abandoned flesh he intends to kill innocent people to make it happen frank the
man is the monster the man you'd walk by in a mall and not give a second look the man you'd say hello to in an elevator
he is the real beast in hellraiser not the cenobites like how you're more likely to be raped or killed by your husband
than anyone you'd meet in an s m club the hell priest eventually christened pinhead by fans though barker loads the name
is not a mindless killer like jason voris or michael myers he's not a killer of innocence like freddy krueger he is
reasonable and only comes when called keeps to himself in his own realm much like the queer community that lived in
cities and was not infiltrating suburbs as so many white americans feared in the late 1980s though he and his fellow
cenobites would grow closer to their slasher brethren as the hellraiser series went on in the original he is not the
monster to be fear the perfectly normal person was but perfectly normal people do have a habit of being monsters [Music]
jennifer's body is the story more or less of anita lesniki needy for short once an insecure teenage girl she is now a
violent inmate in a mental ward narrating her story from solitary confinement since early childhood she had been friends
with the titular jennifer though they had little in common with needy being shy and reserved and jennifer being a
cheerleader together the pair attend a local rock concert at a bar where needy's life changes forever a fire with no
known source engulfs the bar killing multiple people needy pleads with jennifer to stay with her but in her shock she
leaves with the band later that night she turns up at needy's house covered in blood the next day at school she acts as
if everything is right with the world the town is devastated by the fire and the death it caused but not jennifer her
mind is set elsewhere the captain of the football team who she seduces and disembowels after multiple murders it is
revealed that on the night of the fire the band had taken jennifer into the woods and offered her up as a virgin
sacrifice to satan himself in exchange for fame and fortune but jennifer not being a virgin was instead possessed
discovering that jennifer is now a succubus who will feed off of human life to sustain herself needy decides to take
action after a failed attempt that leaves her boyfriend dead she manages to kill jennifer and the demon inside her just
in time for jennifer's mother to discover her on top of her daughter's corpse so off to briarcliff she goes though
loathed upon release the film has more recently been reevaluated as a modern horror classic it's fun messy mean sad
campy and self-aware it's worth mentioning that the advertising campaign for jennifer's body was deeply flawed
portraying it as a sexy thriller in order to play off of star megan fox's hotness it attempted to appeal to the male
fans of the transformers franchise entirely the wrong audience it seemingly borrows its premise from rape revenge movies
and can easily be read that way at first glance what's captivating about it though is that you soon realize that it is
not what the film is actually about what happens to the abusers in the movie is more an afterthought played over the
closing credits as needy having escaped the asylum kills the band who corrupted her friend the actual beating heart of
the story is a messy codependent romance between needy and jennifer the initial scene that seems to be played for laughs
in the movie is of needy ogling jennifer as she cheerleads showing a deep yearning for the raven-haired beauty most of
the remainder of the film is spent escalating the warped hungry tension between the two girls meanwhile chip needy's
boyfriend essentially falls into the role that usually is held for the girlfriend in a horror movie he's either there to
pose a problem for the tumultuous relationship or needs to be rescued for instance early on in the movie chip stands
helplessly by while the girls giggling amongst themselves enter into a play pushing fight until jennifer pushes needy
just a little too hard instantly reading like a scene from an elementary school playground or a boy plays a bit too
rough with a girl because he likes her the undercurrent of tension or even hostility is soon mirrored by needy herself
when she accompanies jennifer to the aforementioned concert she looks on uncomfortably as jennifer plays up the role of
the sweet awkward doe-eyed girl in the hopes of getting the lead singer's romantic attention and retreats until she
overhears the band talking about jennifer being a virgin needy takes this as her cue to storm up to the band taking on
what looks to be a protector role insisting that jennifer is a virgin which is something she knows to be untrue she also
insists that jennifer is not going to sleep with a band of slammy scumbags amanda seyfried's delivery in this scene
evokes more than a protective drive though there's a current of jealous defensiveness roiling just underneath it she
genuinely believes that jennifer is too good to sleep with the band she also resents that jennifer was even considering
it she wants jennifer to be considering sleeping with her instead though it's never stated outright the coding though is
obvious enough for most anyone to see later when jennifer grabs and squeezes needy's hand during the concert proper
needy is appeased and even relieved she smiles warmly adoringly over at jennifer her smile only fades when she realizes
jennifer isn't looking back at her and only has eyes for the band she releases jennifer's hand abruptly and we see the
fading white patches where jennifer had gripped her hand just a little too hard as mentioned before later that night a
bloodied maimed non-verbal and snarling jennifer staggers over to needy's house in the middle of the night desperate and
hungry though jennifer is unable or unwilling to communicate in words what's happened to her her physicality is speaking
volumes this is clearly a nod to both physical manifestations of trauma and a general reference to women in horror
movies and in real life who can't talk about what's happening to them or fear that they won't be believed or understood
this scene doesn't just focus on the horror of the situation though the sexual tension between the two also comes into
focus as jennifer narrowly resists biting needy on the neck looking more like a kiss than a potentially violent act
their relationship is stretched thin over a tumultuous friendship between teenage girls but more than that it speaks to
the nature of attraction between young women whose relationships can be incredibly intimate even between two straight
girls so when one or both of the girls are gay or bi the thin line between platonic female friendship and sexual female
love can become an emotional war zone jennifer uses sex as bait to attract male victims to devour but shows no romantic
interest in any of them their prey nothing else to her one scene shows the uncomfortable simultaneous acts of jennifer
seducing a soon-to-be victim while needy makes love to her bumbling boyfriend looking at the scene through the eye of a
film editor it's easy enough to see what's happening jennifer is the aggressor in her scene while needy is the
submissive partner in hers the cutting back and forth can easily be read as an editing trick to make the mind see
jennifer needy having sex backing up that interpretation is the fact that needy abandons her heterosexual coupling in
order to seek out jennifer after a series of scares she returns home alone unable to find her friend crawling into bed
she finds jennifer there waiting for her wearing one of needy's shirts a girlfriend move if ever there was one this
scene of vulnerability culminates with an actual kiss between the two girls needy pulls away demanding to know what
jennifer has been up to she tells her her story ending it with the line anyway i don't really remember what happened
after that i just know that i woke up and i found my way back to you after all that though needy begins to doubt
jennifer's story feeling her control and her closeness to needy slipping jennifer reaches for the nearest easy target by
trying to make needy insecure about her relationship with chip suggesting that chip is having second thoughts about her
this is the first but not the last effort of jennifer's to drive a wedge between the couple and doing so right on the
heels of an attempted romantic overture is hard to read as anything else than her wanting needy for herself the lesbian
coding is incredibly obvious come on needy let me stay the night we can play boyfriend girlfriend like we used to at the
climax of the film needy confronts jennifer armed with a box cutter leading to an acerbic little double entendre on the
slaying meaning of the word box and jennifer quipping that needy buying her murder weapons at home depot is so butch
this is also the scene in which jennifer finally bites needy while they're fighting the bite isn't lethal though and
it's clear that it wasn't meant to be to me there's a very interesting reading of jennifer's body the queer teenage
girls whose sexualities are only starting to bloom can easily become confused about their relationships with other girls
straight girls and women have much closer more intimate relationships than straight boys and men if you see two girls
holding hands you might not think anything of it if you see a girl running her hand through another girl's hair she's
probably just trying to help her relax kiss on the cheek or even lips that's nothing if you hear two women say i love
you you don't immediately think lesbians well there is a much stricter code of conduct for men and boys no hand holding
no hugs that last for too long and a kiss or an i love you even between fathers and sons absolutely not and so there's a
bit of gay male privilege there if another boy or man is acting very close and intimate the assumption can be made that
he's at the very least not homophobic and quite possibly open to something more the situation is easier to read because
there are so many barriers put up between men a possible upside to toxic masculinity but for young women how can you
tell if another girl is interested in you in a romantic or sexual way because she kissed you held her hand cuddled
you've likely been doing that with female friends all your life as if being a woman wasn't hard enough already 1979's
alien directed by ridley scott is often considered as one of the first feminist science fiction movies with its powerful
central female character and themes of reproduction and sexual violence the film has become lauded for being a
cornerstone in feminist film theory it's also monstrously queer not only is ellen ripley a strong butch heroine who does
not at all fit the usual sci-fi or horror female archetype but according to david mcentee author of beautiful monsters
the film also plays very deliberately with male fears of female reproduction forcing the gestation of life onto male
characters and literally tearing them apart during birth but the queerness in alien reaches beyond the obvious when
writing the screenplay dan o'bannon wanted to focus more on developing the xenomorph as a character and so when writing
the crew he left them more or less generic which included their gender a note on the script reads the crew is unisex and
all parts are interchangeable for men or women from the conception of this story there is a rejection of performative
gender from initial perceptions all of our characters are similarly gendered neutral they wear the same loose jumpsuits
and are addressed by their surnames removing any bases for gendered pronouns the ship's male mechanics complain about
being paid less than everyone else including the female crew at a time in america when women were being paid 60 cents
for every dollar a man made once cast and the actors were given the freedom to play their parts as masculine or feminine
star sigourney weaver decided to play her character as completely gender-neutral in horror especially at the time of
release female characters were always portrayed as victims or damsels in distress while an alien ripley is neither of
those things she's strong and self-reliant furthermore when ripley asserts authority in the team after dallas is caught
by the alien ash the male robot feels threatened and attempts to dominate ripley to regain his masculinity he's a
genderless robot however he exemplifies constructed toxic masculinity aggression a fragile ego and stubbornness he
attacks ripley who exemplifies gender neutrality and sexual equality literally attacking her with gender conformity by
shoving a porn magazine down her throat another male character kane is orally raped by the facehugger this leads to a
forced impregnation leading to death in what is essentially childbirth removing the assumed male privilege of avoiding
the pain of childbirth and bringing it to a horrific conclusion not only is kane raped and killed but gives birth to a
vicious bloodthirsty phallus it's been no secret that h.r geiger designed every form of the xenomorph to represent sex
organs both male and female masculine and feminine the overt and grotesque sexual imagery in the alien is designed to
evoke fear and anxiety which is how society was already responding to sexual openness and breaking out of what it means
to be typically male and female the aliens phallic and vaginal components are used together in stark contrast from the
traits and qualities usually assigned to them thus deconstructing notions of gender the alien's body is overtly sexual
and blurs our ideas of anatomy the horror and sexual violence from the alien including the penetration of lambert and
forcing dallas into a womb-like egg as an allusion to motherhood suggests that having one pair of genitals or another
doesn't make you inherently violent but that society's construction of gender is to blame we get a less coded queer
representation in 1986's sequel when for a split second we see a biography of the character lambert from the first film
the biography establishes lambert as having had her gender reassigned from male to female lambert's bio reads despite
conversion at birth from male to female so far there are no signs of suppressed trauma from gender reassignment and so
in a horror movie from 1979 we technically have a transgender character who is never othered never misgendered and is
not a villain a retcon that changes nothing about the story but adds trans representation when little if any was
available james cameron's aliens is curiously progressive in its sexual politics overall especially for a movie released
during the reagan years take for instance the exchange between hudson and frost hey i sure wouldn't mind getting some
more of that yeah the one that you had was male 1 it doesn't matter when it's so the butch space marine slept with a man
and nobody makes a big deal out of it except for frost who wants to do it again and he is wholeheartedly supported this
isn't just queer behavior being portrayed in a positive manner but one of the many ways that the movie obfuscates gender
and supports a pansexual ethos the queer icon of aliens though is the female space marine vasquez who is tougher than
most of the men in her squad in a movie released 27 years before the united states military even let women take on
combat roles but is she herself queer the actors who played her jeanette goldstein weighed in on that question in 2016.
she's an outsider she was just who she was with vasquez i never said she was straight or gay because to her it was
nobody's business a lot of gay women come up and say oh my god when i saw you and you had a masculine look to you i saw
myself but i had straight women coming up to me with the same thing someone was going through breast cancer and she told
me that with each round of chemo she would think of vasquez a gay man from guatemala came to me and he said i identify
so much with her he was very feminine vasquez is universal elsewhere in the film is bishop another sexless cyborg like
the first film's ash david grevin in demeter and persephone in space observes bishop the cyborg retooled as a queer
suffering body is an example of a resistant masculinity devoid of any obvious sexual desire such figures suggest queer
sexuality in films and television in that their refusal of the normative codes of masculinity suggest an alternative to
them as with ash but much more pitiably the white blood that drenches bishops suggests both mother's milk and semen but
in a radical decontextualization semen here suggests the vulnerability of male bodies their susceptibility to violation
rather than unseemly urges grevin further suggests that the aliens and especially the alien queen represent a
cisgendered heteronormative status quo that resents the changing times what gives this entire spectacle of shaming its
radical charge is the queer typing of ripley as mother with her short hair and male garb ripley combines the masculine
and the feminine with her casual indifference to heterosexual sex despite some no sweat flirtation with hicks she
suggests the possibility of different sexual needs with her adoption of a child she suggests the lesbian mother who
thinks outside the normative procreational box the alien queen's vicious contempt conveys the charge of an old customary
inability to recognize the beauty and heroism in queer love of the kind ripley and newt embody read as a queer allegory
ripley newt the reintegrated android bishop and the wounded vulnerable and bedridden hicks together constitute the new
queer family the alien queen a repository of old modes of contempt and hate so while gribben suggests that the
conservative alien queen has contempt for the queer family dynamic the metaphor could go even further cameron creates a
future where gender norms have all but disappeared even subtle things like fashion such as the female whalenutani
executive at ripley's hearing wearing a power suit and sporting an androgynous haircut to the fact that the marines have
a co-ed locker room suggest the battle of the sexes ended in a draw it's the alien queen who although she rules over an
army of male drones is actually trapped within the biological determinism of her sex forever cranking out eggs she
ironically wants to destroy this new world and turn back the clock a few centuries there's also the aids allegory of the
entire alien franchise though obviously not intended for the first film which came out before aids became well known the
sexual imagery of the xenomorph's many forms and the imminent death associated with them make h.r geiger's beasts easy
analogues for the deadly bloodborne virus especially in the sequel where just one alien one drop of infected blood or
semen can create such an infection that completely overwhelms the host planet or body this became especially prescient
with the release of alien 3. the death of newton hicks before the film even begins is central to this message aids
seemingly kills at random the young and innocent like newt the healthy young men like hicks or like ripley you might
avoid the disease by pure luck then there's the population of fury 161 an almost completely abandoned prison planet one
of the higher ups realizes that they can potentially wrangle this little alien problem into a profitable venture much
like how big pharma companies worked on releasing oppressively expensive treatments instead of working toward a cure and
this speech from dylan the only question is how you check out do you want it on your feet or on your [ __ ] knees i
ain't much for begging hitting like larry kramer's 1987 speech when he launched act up the alien created by h.r geiger
brought to life by ridley scott and perfected by james cameron is a monster that exploited our fears of gender sex
infection and lost control a monster so ravenous there is no escape but not all monsters are so obvious [Music] it
follows tells the story of jay a 19 year old suburban girl who acquires a sexually transmitted curse from her boyfriend
hugh after they first have sex hugh sedates her forcing her to heed his instructions about the curse she must sleep with
someone as soon as she can in order to pass it along to another person and on and on or else she'll be tracked down and
killed by another worldly entity the titular it if it kills her it will resume tracking hue since it follows only one
person at a time the monster in it follows may be a supernatural being but the film's true source of horror is living
under a regime of sexual shame where our heteronormative culture compels sexual subjects toward monogamy even at the
risk of their overall well-being though many critics pointed out that it follows cleverly subverts the usual you have
sex you die trope from 1980 slasher movies few grasped the idea that the monster in the film would more or less become
harmless in a society where sexual promiscuity was the norm having sex with new partners on a regular basis constantly
shifting its targets to the point at which it could follow but never catch up in time to kill at a glance it follows
would seem unlikely to have a queer reading since it doesn't feature any queer characters or monsters that could be
easily coded as such nor does it feature any of the homoerotic undertones of movies like a nightmare on elm street ii
the lost boys or rope instead its queerness is less monolithic for some viewers a horror movie that depicts sexual
partners spreading a deadly curse via sex might seem deeply sex negative indeed many reviewers saw the film's central
conceit as tapping into the fears of anyone who came of age during the aids crisis the threat of aids has of course long
been allegorically linked to popular horror imagery like the aforementioned alien john carpenter's the thing david
cronenberg's the fly or any number of post-80s vampire tales but the film's queer lesson is less about the avoidance of
sex than the management of risk after all according to the film's logic those infected by the curse can survive only by
successfully finding new sexual partners versus remaining abstinent and living out the fatal consequences of their prior
sexual history the film barely acknowledges that jay has any other option but to find new partners and it's her
hesitance to move beyond a series of monogamous bonds that could ultimately prove to be her downfall therefore the film
implies that having a sex life is inevitable and always involves a certain level of risk emotional or physical but the
film also suggests that the danger truly lies in the social attitudes that make sex and promiscuity shameful we're also
told very clearly that jay was not a virgin at the beginning of the film when she acquired the curse and therefore the
allegorical infection shouldn't be looked at as some kind of punishment for premarital or non-procreative sex as it
would be in so many other movies in the genre importantly neither hugh nor the film in general ever specify which sexual
acts will successfully pass along the curse thus opening plenty of space for queer speculation is heterosexual sex the
only option will same-sex partners do the trick do oral or anal sex count what about non-genital forms of sexuality s m
kink or masturbation maybe just how conventional and vanilla are the expectations of this paranormal being the idea of
destigmatizing promiscuous sex was particularly timely when it follows hit theaters media attention had just begun
addressing the slow growing popularity of drugs like truvada as a way to stop new hiv infections not only does the drug
reduce the likelihood of a positive person passing on the disease in some cases making it impossible but can also
prevent the disease from taking hold if taken by hiv negative people thus reopening a part of queer sexual life that had
been more or less shut off since the 1980s but anyone who mentioned that they were using the drug commonly known as prep
immediately found themselves being slut-shamed many doctors could be judgmental of patients asking for the once a day
pill thrusting their moral opinions on a medical issue and so for some time many people in the gay community refuse to
ask their doctors for a prescription shaming people for wanting to add an extra layer of safety to their sex life prep
is much more common now resulting in transmission rates of the hiv virus dropping dramatically but for a time right
around the release of it follows the shame of being seen as promiscuous by doctors or friends stopped a lot of people
from getting the new little blue pill until then anything but monogamy even with a condom was looked at as a risky
dangerous and irresponsible behavior in much of the queer community it follows appeared at a historical moment when a
hetero turned homo normative model of monogamy was upheld as law of the land while a countervailing trend saw the
partial overcoming of long-time anxieties about the most infamously fatal of sex-born diseases opening fresh
possibilities for sexual autonomy the film may not have been deliberately intended as a socio-political commentary on
such shifts indeed david robert mitchell the film's writer director left the monster's motives and weaknesses
nightmarishly unexplained and open to interpretation but the place of queerness as a sort of structuring absence within
the film an unnamed but perpetually haunting presence still speaks to a queer audience but just like how prep has not
completely disposed of hiv the monster in it follows is similarly relentless following a traumatic confrontation that
ends with jay agreeing to pass the curse along to a boy who's had a crush on her since childhood the apparently
monogamous couple walk hand in hand down a quiet suburban street unaware that behind them it follows [Music] not all
horror movies deal with the supernatural some are more than happy to terrify you with what you know best your friends
your family your home turning something mundane into something truly terrifying bringing horror to a place that it never
should have been that's something that horror expert wes craven did all too well by making the violent killer of a film
someone you would have usually sympathized with in the last house on the left perverting the relative safety of dreams
with a nightmare on elm street blurring the lines between horror and real life with his new nightmare and then bringing
horror to the safest of all places in clinton america the suburbs with scream written by outgay screenwriter kevin
williamson scream tells the tale of sydney prescott who a year after her mother's murder is having those old wombs
figuratively and literally reopened but the queerness of the film has nothing to do with sydney or her mother but with
the killers billy and stu as well as the uncomfortable social changes toward a more lgbt accepting society in the late
1990s in terms as resonant as they were phobic scream was a cry of despair over an apparent immorality in the millennial
or late gen x youth especially in the male population the homoeroticism of the billy stew relationship which the film
develops into an all but explicit queer love affair shows both the unpredictable anarchic bewildering behavior of the
generation and the shifts in male gender roles synonymous with it scream redeploys the long-standing american tradition
of a homoerotic bond between a pair of young male killers the foundation of the tradition is the infamous leopoldon loeb
case these wealthy young men were university of chicago students who murdered the fourteen-year-old bobby franks in 1924
both were sentenced to life in prison with one of them being murdered by another inmate shortly after sentencing this
case generated several fictional treatments including hitchcock's 1948 film rope which i covered in monsters in the
closet these killers considered themselves to be nietzschean supermen using their superior intellect as justification
for their thrill killing billy and stu however have no such lofty philosophical ambitions their motivations are family
and romance driven billy claims to be avenging himself for sydney's mother's crime of destroying his family and stu
seemingly is just doing it for billy scream also offers contrasting portraits of masculinity but only in order to
intensify its vision of an increasing cultural depravity perhaps the first touch that links the killers to queerdom is
ghostface's first appearance to sydney he tries to trick her into believing that he's on her front porch the killer then
jumps out of her closet instead there's also the image of sydney's open closet door protecting her from harm i might be
reaching here but it's not hard to read that as it's better to have your closet door open than closed skeet ulrich's
performance as billy and especially matthew lillards as stu deepened the queer resonance that stand forever on a knife's
edge of obviousness ulrich's bloody intensity and perpetual white t-shirt clearly evoke james dean and rebel without a
cause the intense look in his eyes either sad or cunning keeps the audience as off-balance to his identity as it does
sydney but when he does reveal his murderous identity the facade dissolves entirely and he passes through intensity into
truly frightening the dark underbelly of his pristine all-american geniality lillard stew meanwhile is notable for his
gender bending potential he uses his basketball player height rubbery face and excessive emotionalism to create a
memorably frantic character that would shock no one if he suddenly appeared in full drag in one scene set in the video
store where randy of movie geek works randy theorizes about billy's possible identity as the killer in perhaps the most
homoerotic moment in the film billy suddenly swings upon randy challenging him how do we know you're not the killer huh
huh hi billy maybe your movie freaked mine lost it's reality button you ever think of that as billy gets in randy's face
stu comes up from behind him in a shockingly intimate almost threesome what has been called femmephobia intersects here
with homophobia as the killer's increasingly inept performance of gender mirrors their ultimately inept attempt to craft
the perfect murder plot craven makes the interesting choice to stage the big revelation scene at the climax of the film
in the kitchen the mama's boy killers reveal the nefarious identities within the domestic space most closely associated
with the mother earlier in the film billy and sydney have sex after she announces that if life is one big movie genre
her pick is porn ghostface suddenly appears right after they've finished and seemingly stabs billy to death one can
assume that he's been watching them do the deed the entire time of course we soon learn that this is only a ruse to
distract sydney from billy's real identity as one of the killers billy staggers back to life in his seemingly
blood-drenched t-shirt getting possession of the gun sydney had been wielding billy shoots randy and then dabs a finger
in his blood and brings it up to his lips there's also the negative oedipus complex homosexuality is the chief aspect of
it in a footnote added in 1910 to his 1905 three essays on the theory of sexuality sigmund freud conjecture's homosexual
identity emerges from an identification with the mother and billy is nothing if not obsessed with his mother while many
have read freud's theory as homophobic it would likely be fairer to say that it's been put to homophobic use in american
psychiatry which historically used it to pathologize homosexuality as an arrested development what scream makes vividly
clear is the cultural reception of narcissistic mother identified desire the killers and scream are monstrous not only
because they kill but because their desire proceeds from identification with the mother what complicates or is left
deliberately unresolved by the filmmakers is the specific nature of the boy's relationship with each other stu's desire
is left especially unclear but in some ways it is his desire that more clearly has a basis in the homoerotic stu has a
girlfriend dispatched via garage door but his chief affection is directed toward billy to whom he's quite clearly
devoted what is most significant about stu's relationship with billy are the ways in which billy's desire becomes stu's
desires becoming an easy analog for the feeling of many gay teenage boys who will do anything play any sport see any
movie take any drug in a desperate attempt to connect with their male crushes a queer reading becomes more obvious at
least to me when the pair of killers decide they need to stab each other in order to frame sydney for the killings
penetrating one another to show their devotion replicating the pain of virginal anal sex scream with its queer coding
delicious dialogue and willingness to reach into camp territory when necessary has become a classic slasher among the
queer community while we watch it as a smart send up of the genre which was well and dead in 1996 many people of the
more hetero persuasion see the film a bit differently it's the horror of danger coming to the suburbs a place of safety
being perverted where nice white families fled to in order to escape the poor black and queer horrors that filled the
city streets and in scream the queer horror penetrated that safety it also tore apart the idea of the ideal american
family billy's family was torn asunder when sydney's mother had an affair with his father leading to a divorce and his
mother leaving town and so he took sydney's mother away from her too the fragility of the straight nuclear family coming
to a bloody end just as the new millennium dawned showing us all that families though a nice idea can lead to unexpected
horrors in 2017 a perhaps unlikely queer icon emerged in the form of a black and white cartoon character from australia
with sharp teeth theatrical makeup and a top hat this cultural phenomenon began with the 2016 tumblr thread initiated by
online user e instagram who declared mr babadook the titular monster from jennifer kent's 2014 horror film to be
fearlessly and proudly gay in his initial post instagram wonders whenever someone says that the babadook isn't openly
gay it's like did you even watch the movie sparking what participants called a baba discourse scores of others weighed
in on the tumblr thread with one user proclaiming the b in lgbt stands for babadook the next several months saw the
proliferation of queer babadook memes and multiple representations of the babudooka 2017 pride festivals across the
united states the babadook has emerged as a queer icon because he can be read as having characteristics associated with
cultural gayness for example he wears dramatic costuming that recalls the theatricality of drag and he struggles against
a rather literally closeted existence in which many disavow or reject him while references to these characteristics
abound in the typically humorous and ironic examples of the character's queerness this monster and the film from which
he emerges call for critical attention to normative constructions of the family the hegemony of reproductive
heterosexuality and the implications of both for the lives of women that is the babadook invites queer appropriation
because he represents the horrors of heteronormative family life and gender politics while socially conservative
rhetoric frequently casts the family as a site of innocence imperiled by outside forces the babadook constructs the
family as a site that is too often constituted by multiple forms of systemic physical and emotional violence narratively
the babadook written and directed by jennifer kent is the story of emilia a single mother and her only son samuel on the
day her son would be born amelia and her husband oscar have a car accident on the way to the hospital and oscar dies
having given up her career as a writer to earn a living as a nursing home attendant emilia has been samuel's only
caregiver an isolating experience exasperated by both other people's uneasiness with her grief and by their ableist
discomfort with samuel's differences emilia's ability to care for her son becomes severely constrained when she decides
she must remove him from his school which seems unwilling or unable to accommodate his needs at the same time samuel
becomes fixated on an invisible monster that he warns lives in their house when a mysterious and violent children's book
appears amelia begins to fear that the monster is not a figment of samuel's imagination and soon she and her home are
tormented by a boogeyman known as the babadook who lives under her child's bed and in his closet as anxiety
sleeplessness and trauma take a toll on amelia she first directs her anger at samuel becoming violent before eventually
confronting the babadook she realizes she can never fully rid their lives of the monster that now resides in their home
she determines to make relative peace with it locking it in their basement but keeping it well fed and alive as
illustrated by a line in the babadook's book the more you deny the stronger i get the monster operates as a signifier of
emilia's grief over oscar's death the more she represses this trauma the more power it has to return and disrupt her
life this allegory is not however the only one at work within the babadook amelia appears as a 21st century sister of
rosemary from rosemary's baby as the babadook crosses the horror formula of other as villain with the female gothic
interest in gendered experience and victimhood transforming the beleaguered female protagonist herself into a monster
backing up the idea that the greatest monsters do not come from without or from within that perhaps the monsters in
heteronormative suburbia did not come from the outside from cities but that they've been there all along and how does
one become a suburban monster by trying to fit in emilia is struggling financially and the depiction of the life she
leads with her son shows the economic vulnerability of single-parent families especially single mothers her stress to
keep everything running smoothly to try for normal is what drives her to become the maternal monster that strikes out at
her own son the babadook on the other hand ostensibly coded queer does no actual harm to amelia or samuel it is just the
fear of him that causes harm it is the societal pressure of the heteronormative world that causes harm amelia's paranoia
the sense of being watched originates in the way her public life is dominated by and private life intruded upon by
institutional and bureaucratic forces that scrutinize her and especially her parenting first the representatives of the
school system that had failed samuel and then the community service representatives that take over then there are the
disturbing encounters with others that she hopes will help her the doctor who judges her when she requests sleeping
pills to make samuel sleep so that she herself can sleep and the desk sergeant in the police station who when amelia
attempts to report a stalker looks back at her with the strange pale eyes of the storybook monster both encounters show
historically strained relations between institutional authorities and women under threat society is actively and
passively harming her while the queer monster remains mostly benign in acknowledgment of these real everyday social
pressures on emilia the forum taken by the babadook references the familiar source of her madness and monstrosity there
are elements of samuel as the babadook's garb recalls the little boy's homemade magician's costume while the threat of
its mouth in the pop-up book offers a horror movie version of samuel's screams for attention and then there's the house
a victorian style house that kent had constructed specifically for this film and that operates as a character in its own
right specifically of note are the ways that the home in the film diverges from both idealized constructions of the home
and the role of the home within the horror movie genre the signifier of the home often functions as an allegory for
heteronormative sexist ablest and classist figurations of family how homeownership is often considered a milestone for
success and stability for those a part of or wishing to be a part of the heteronormative masses how often the home acts
as a site for the production and regulation of bodies that are normatively gendered and sexed and how consistently the
culture of suburban home life and typical design practices presume that a house's inhabitants will all be fully abled
thereby rendering them inaccessible to those who are not physically ideal the single-family home acting as a sort of
moated castle protecting the inhabitants from the working poor they might otherwise come across in an apartment building
or the infirm in a nursing home or the other races or queers and select ghettoized areas but in the babadook those
others infiltrate the home and cause no harm threaten yes but never act only the self causes harm not the other the
babadook's queerness lies in its subversion of the family in its apparent danger to what is accepted by society by only
growing in power the more it is denied like a gaping wound that begins to fester each time a person lies about their
sexuality every time someone pretends to be someone they're not so that society will accept them and there's an odd draw
to the black and white monster for queer people outside the movie it was looked at as a joke like so many queer icons
initially are cher judy garland dolly parton all looked at as over the top and worth nothing more than derision and then
they enter into a cultural permanence once they're adopted by the queer community someone was like how could the
babadook become a gay film and the answer was readily available said karen thompson an associate professor of gender
studies in english at usc he lives in a basement he's weird and flamboyant he's living adjacently to a single mother in
this kind of queer kinship structure he exists in a half-acknowledged state by the other people in his house the family
is afraid of what he is but finds a way to accept him over time for many lgbt people that's what it feels like to be in
your own family sometimes naturally there are counter arguments the babadook never says he's gay he never displays
physical attraction to another person but historically fictional characters haven't needed to say i am gay out loud to
be read as queer or to become queer icons so many lgbt people have been barred from seeing themselves represented in
popular culture so we've had to project ourselves into so many of these figures thongson said there are ways to read
into the character itself and the structure of how this ostensibly monstrous thing becomes incorporated ultimately into
a family but is the babadook gay when asked about this in 2019 director jennifer kent simply replied of course sometimes
it's just that simple sometimes the monster the queer can be accepted sometimes suburbia isn't so bad but sometimes it
can be a nightmare [Music] it by stephen king was published in 1986 and has made a lasting cultural impression the novel
inspired a mini-series two movies and ruined clowns for generations of children and adults frankly pennywise transforms
into things that will scare people the most and stephen king used the 1950s setting to pay tribute to classic movie
monsters since its release the novel has inspired fans to discuss its themes allegories and underlying subtext a common
discussion is the interpretation that richie tozier and eddie kasprak had strong repressed gay feelings for one another
the most recent adaptation it chapter 2 directed by andy musgetty dedicates an entire subplot to the romance between
richie and eddie there have been protests that the character's change in sexuality comes out of nowhere but that's not
so quite cut and dry when eddie first encounters pennywise the titular it he's at a place known to attract hobos and
drifters it takes the form of a hobo who's stricken with disease it uses a leper to frighten eddie instead of your
typical horror movie monster one of these fellows had crawled out from under the porch of the house at 29 nybolt street
one day and had offered to give eddie a [ __ ] for a quarter eddie had backed away his skin like ice his mouth as dry as
lint balls one of the hobo's nostrils had been eaten away you could look right into the red scabby channel i i don't
have a quarter eddie said backing toward his bike do it for a dime the hobo croaked coming toward him he was wearing old
green flannel pants yellow puke was stiffening across the lap he unzipped his fly and reached inside he was trying to
grin his nose was a red horror uh i don't have a dime either eddie said and suddenly thought oh my god he's got leprosy
if he touches me i'll catch it too his control snapped and he ran he heard the hobo break into a shuffling run behind
him his old string tied shoes slapping and flapping across the riotous lawn of the empty saltbox house eddie's physical
manifestation of fear has symbolic meaning that is linked to his abusive upbringing eddie sees it as a leper because his
mother's insistence that he is sickly and delicate has made him afraid of disease eddie is horrified of the leper's
appearance but the real terror doesn't set in until he realizes that he could catch its illness the leper uses the offer
of sexual favors to scare him nowhere else in the story does pennywise threaten the children with sexual assault so its
decision to do so here is an important distinction this metaphor is significant because the leper is a sickly diseased
man offering oral sex to eddie and its combination of these things shows us a deep fear eddie has unknown even to
himself eddie's afraid of doing sexual things with men because he believes he will get a disease and die its use of the
leper as a manifestation of eddie's fear is our first clue that eddie is queer-coded because he is groomed to fear
disease and sickness he fears his own homosexuality and views it as something that could kill him though this section of
the book takes place in the 1950s the book itself was published in the chaotic midst of the aids crisis when gay sex
really could lead to a disease and death we also get some interesting religious imagery as eddie thinks back to the root
of his religious fear he's quick to dismiss religious rules as stupid but stops himself as he remembers he takes
religion seriously enough to be afraid of it it's interesting that eddie fears going to hell even though he's never done
anything to warrant it reading eddie's inner turmoil as the result of suppressed homosexual feelings it makes sense for
eddie to wonder about going to hell because of who he is rather than something he's done another coded aspect of eddie's
hidden sexuality is how he interacts with the other losers in one scene stephen king singles out eddie as being
delighted by bill we get an explanation for eddie's unmatched joy when eddie tries to imitate bill modelling himself
after the boy in order to come across as brave eddie idolizes bill and his love is rooted in that admiration there are
many references to eddie having hero worship for bill or seeming to love bill more than the other losers this is
disguised as eddie simply idolizing bill but it reads much clearer as an unrequited crush on him with eddie simply not
knowing how to categorize it another member of the losers club that hits home with queer readers is richie a character
many people even straight readers have interpreted as being bisexual he like most of the boys in the group has at least
a bit of a crush on beverly the lone girl but also a clear connection with eddie as well not just in friendship or love
but in trauma childhood trauma looms under the skin of the losers club well into adulthood as it chapter 2 explores the
reunion of the crew in their hometown for most of the children their trauma existed on the surface of the first it film
eddie's overbearing mother beverly's father verbally abusing her and sexually taunting her as she begins to grow into
her adult body mike seeing his parents burned alive six out of the seven losers left dairy as soon as they were old
enough leaving allowed them to forget the trauma but leaving didn't remove it just tucked it away out of sight where it
could seep out and impact their life later on both beverly and eddie married a version of their abusive parents bill now
a writer can't think of a happy ending ever since his little brother georgie was murdered by pennywise stanley is so
terrorized by his childhood torment that he kills himself when he finds out that it has returned like every person on
the planet the losers remain trapped in their trauma they've just found new ways to cope richie ended up telling jokes
and becoming rich and successful but always alone throughout it chapter 2 it becomes clear that richie is a closeted gay
man in love with eddie mostly this revelation becomes clear through two scenes the first is a flashback of richie
hanging out at an arcade the same summer of the losers defeated pennywise see the movies take place bit further ahead of
time than the book he plays street fighter with a boy he's had a crush on when the kid says he has to go richie offers
to pay for the next round unfortunately his crush's cousin henry bowers lives to torment richie and his friends now face
to face with a stab happy bully and surrounded by the judging eyes of his peers richie's sexuality and therefore
masculinity is challenged by his crush richie runs out of the arcade and seeks refuge in a public park before him stands
the symbol of masculinity a giant ax swinging paul bunyan looming 20 feet high in his flannel and denim he's a stark
contrast to richie's blue and pink swirled button-up shirt the american folk hero instantly becomes a threat with
shredded teeth the second scene that reveals ritchie is queer doesn't happen until eddie dies everyone is sad but richie
is beside himself so overcome with emotion that he has to be hauled out of the sewer by his friends adult ritchie
doesn't seem to fit into a 2019 narrative not everyone can come out in america but richie works as a comedian in los
angeles even if he chose to keep his sexuality close to the vest the idea that gay marriage and giant pride parades
could miss a white man working in hollywood doesn't make sense if it did highlighting that fact would be vital to
understanding the character the murky nature of richie's queer identity feels like a letdown the second chapter of it
attempts to reveal the way dormant childhood trauma springs forth in adulthood anything buried will eventually rise to
the surface except for richie's sexuality apparently the queer community is still struggling to be seen in cinema as
more than tragic romances or gay best friends the balance of the identity representation within the losers club offered
an awesome opportunity to detail the effects of the past 30 years on the most privileged members of the community but in
the film richie a well-off white masculine gay man never even says that he's gay out loud not everything in it is coding
though very early on in the story we are shown the brutal gay bashing and violent murder of adrian mellon a murder so
heinous it wakes the titular it from its decades-long slumber king's language is harsh with characters using a vast
array of homophobic slurs in those early pages but those characters using them even the police are not celebrated the
author is very clearly judging them and it's this horrible violence so soon into the book that shows the darkness and
hate lurking under the surface of small town america it is the hate that's unnatural the hate that is evil not being
queer when we get into the head of don hagerty adrian's boyfriend and the author lets the reader know him he's
sympathetic he's smart and loving he also sees the town for what it is sees its evil clearly and wants to leave it
though the characters in the book don't empathize with him for having his boyfriend killed in front of him the author
does he shows the gay character as human in the midst of reagan america the world's best-selling author was sending a
very blunt message stephen king thought gay people should be able to date and hold hands and live their lives stephen
king did not think gay people should be tortured or killed he thought that those who would torture or kill gay people
were in the service of evil as were those who would tolerate it or look away the victims of homophobia did not deserve
to be victims homophobia stephen king seemed to say is not the natural way of the world it is a monstrous thing and
those who practice it are a part of the monster like the babadook hellraiser jennifer's body the craft and king's own
carry the queer is not the monster something else is gay men lesbian women bisexual people transgender people everyone
under the queer umbrella we are not the monsters you are not the monster but the society that demonizes you that others
you that is the monster [Music] you
