---
date: 2023-03-15
title: When Hollywood Came Out of the Closet
parent: pW_RjbZYi1s
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "Opening Hollywood's Closet (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
links: !!seq
notes:
  - hbomb

contributors:
  downloaded: $cite$TerraJRiley

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---

this video is brought to you by Squarespace this film is not about lesbianism
it's about the power of lies to destroy people's lives this film is not about
homosexuality it's about loneliness this film is not about homosexuality it's
about insanity [Music] this film is definitely about homosexuality the boys in
the band is a 1970 American film directed by William friedkin of Exorcist Fame
based on the 1968 Off-Broadway play of the same name by Mark Crowley the film
takes place in New York City in 1968 and follows a group of gay friends who
gather for a birthday party the main character is Michael a neurotic and
self-loathing gay man who is hosting the party for his friend Harold a
flamboyant and witty gay man as the night wears on the guests become
increasingly drunk and confrontational leading to heated arguments and
Revelations about their personal lives the arrival of a straight friend Alan
adds to the tension as he is uncomfortable with the gay culture and the open
homosexuality on display as the night progresses the character's relationships
with each other become more complicated leading to a climactic confrontation
that exposes their vulnerabilities and insecurities on the strength of a classy
set of New York stage reviews and its billing as a comedy despite its dead
serious content the boys in the band was taken for gospel in an America
populated by people who had never met a homosexual in their entire lives the
film was not positive but it was fair the only heterosexual character Alan can
easily despise the Nelly Emery because he is everything a gay is supposed to be
a butterfly in heat Alan even comes to pity The Battered in the end but what
scares Alan and the audience what they could not come to terms with or
understand is the homosexuality of Hank and Larry who are both just as Queer as
Emery yet look just as straight as Alan the possibility that there could be
non-stereotypical homosexuals who are also staunch Advocates of a working gay
relationship is presented by the two lovers throughout the film and they are the
two characters most often ignored by critics and analysts it is Larry who speaks
of rejecting heterosexual concepts of marriage and creating a relationship with
respect for one another's freedoms with no need to lie or pretend at the end of
the film Larry and Hank win a telephone Truth game that Michael has viciously
devised when they call each other and say I love you it is when Larry and Hank
Express affection for each other physically and verbally that the audience and
the lone straight party guests are most uncomfortable in contrast Michael's
inability to deal with his own homosexuality is exposed as old-time movie
melodrama and Harold's final equally melodramatic speech puts it into
perspective you're a homosexual and you don't want to be but there's nothing you
can do to change it not all your prayers to your God not all the analysis you
can buy in all the years you've got left to live you may very well one day be
able to know a heterosexual life if you want it desperately enough if you pursue
it with the fervor with which you annihilate but you'll always be homosexual as
well always Michael always the speech encapsulated self-hatred and reflected a
generation of gay men who were indoctrinated to blame their problems all on
their homosexuality in the end Michael's self-hatred and inability to function
became as archaic as Harold's habit of putting his weed in a Band-Aid box in the
Medicine Chest so that he could flush it down the toilet in case the cops
arrived Michael's weeping fits and old movie Visions Shone light not on his
homosexuality but on the fallacies and illusions of Hollywood dreams dreams that
had taught gay men that they were not welcome in polite Society Hollywood was
not moved to change a wit by all of this hysteria in gay drawing rooms in
Manhattan though yet boys in the band moved gay men throughout the country the
internalized guilt and self-hatred of eight gay men at a Manhattan birthday
party formed the best and most potent argument for Gay Liberation ever offered
in popular media it provided actual and personal instances of the detrimental
repercussions of what gay men learn about themselves through media falsehoods
and the film sparked the first public pushback by a budding gay rights movement
against Crowley's plays accepted prejudices gay protesters did not deny the
existence of such stereotypes but they were quick to point out that the
Viewpoint was one-sided and the Prejudice is defined as the sole depiction or
representation of any group of people by a minority stereotype the boys in the
band was a movie about gays and a gay movie it was a creation born of a
subculture and reflected a harsh reflection Society viewed it as if it were a
scientific trip but it was an interior Journey for many gays who were shocked by
the sadness of Michael's sickening rituals many of Crowley's caricatures were
misconceptions that gays had accepted and even fit themselves into since there
seemed to be no other option the audience for boys in the band included gay
people who had grown up thinking that they were the only gays in the world the
film explored passing and not being able to pass loving and not being able to
love and above all else surviving in a world that denied one's very existence
but it did so before an American public that was at the stage of barely being
able to mention homosexuality at all but before we explore in more detail how
homosexuality actually started to be shown on film let's hear a word from our
sponsor this video is brought to you by Squarespace building a site with
Squarespace is a great way to build your brand and reach a wider audience
whether you're a visual artist photographer a writer a video producer or work in
any creative field it's vital to have a site that you can use to help build your
brand on your own terms Nick and I have had a presence on social media for a
while now and obviously this channel but using Squarespace is incredibly
intuitive and easy to use tools we've built the James Summerton Channel website
featuring a Blog where Nick and I write about topics that probably wouldn't make
for a full video a special section where you can check out preview chapters of
my upcoming novel as well as check out Nick's novel gentlemen's club and using
squarespace's video hosting features we're able to give you access to videos
that YouTube made us remove you can head to squarespace.com right now for a free
trial and when you're ready to launch your site go to squarespace.com James S
that's j-a-m-e-s-s to save 10 off of your first purchase of a website or domain
start showing the world how amazing you are today with Squarespace [Music]
foreign [Music] [Music] [Music] foreign [Music] within a few years of boys in
the band there was summer wishes Winter Dreams in which Joanne Woodward's Sons
homosexuality is solely perceived in terms of how it impacts her current midlife
crisis as yet another sign of her failure as a wife and mother she eventually
comes to terms with it but her son leaves for Amsterdam with a friend and
refuses to visit his parents until they can live with him as he truly is he
makes their reluctance to recognize him as a full person their problem a family
affair rather than his a very natural thing the first film with homosexual
Liberation themes designed for commercial distribution was then released in
1973. the film investigated the possibilities available to gay couples on
society's terms and raised the questions how do two guys who refuse to play
society's game Define a non-roll-based relationship while the film was inspired
by the Gay Liberation movement it was dismissed as a trivial soap opera by The
Establishment press and Savaged by gay liberationists for its romantic Illusions
and lack of radical conviction David an ex-seminarian teaches School in New York
City and settles into a monogamous relationship with Mark a straight identified
insurance salesman in the film the first part of the movie examines their
meeting romance Union and split the relationship is a protracted and planned
Love Story parody in which they go to the Opera roll in the fall leaves in
Central Park watch each other shave in the morning and imitate every
heterosexual movie cliche about love and marriage the can connection ends due to
Mark's reluctance to be possessed and David's nagging fears David investigates
the Alternatives in the second half of the film promiscuous sex and Fire Island
bath houses and orgies are as unsatisfactory to him as his persistent loneliness
David meets Jason a divorce photographer who helps him begin to alter his
Notions about the nature of homosexual relationships Freedom From The Assumption
of roles in an unstructured relationship is difficult to depict on film in a
poetic style without inviting skepticism but the filmmakers were aware of this
and purposefully opted to regard romance as the bottom line as a result of the
filmmakers couching his message in such endlessly romantic terms the picture
enraged the same people fighting for such a political redefinition a very
natural thing had such significant promotion and distribution issues that it had
little influence however it is still viewed as a breakthrough film in queer
Cinema Theory classes the New York Post described it as an argument rather than
entertainment while Judith Christ said if the Gay Liberation movement wants its
own mediocre movie here it is elsewhere in cinemas John Schlesinger's Sunday
Bloody Sunday was a poignant understanding and interesting story that has
consistently been cited since as an example of a good gay film that failed to
make it at the box office proof that homosexuality is not a money-making
proposition in movie terms the problem however was in the packaging Sunday
Bloody Sunday was a talky introspective British production that wasn't intended
for a wide audience in the United States it was noted in the 1980s that there
appears to be very little room in the American Market anymore for the small but
interesting film according to producers and writers this is now the specialty of
Television films interesting how history repeats itself as small and interesting
now seems to be the Forte of streaming services this film Schlesinger said is
not about the sexuality of these people these movies never seem to be about the
sexuality of the people in them these people were a gay doctor a straight career
lady and a bisexual artist with whom they were both in love Sunday Bloody Sunday
was not about sexuality as Schlesinger correctly said however it was a film in
which alternative sexuality was taken for granted something that gay activists
had long sought it was a film on human relationships and how they do not always
correspond to our expectations of what love should be the film portrayed a
joyful ending for a gay character whose boring resignation is not the result of
his homosexuality in his final monologue he informs the audience they say it
never made you happy and I said but I am happy apart from missing him all my
life I've been looking for somebody courageous resourceful he's not it but
something we were something but America despised Sunday Bloody Sunday one kiss
between the men created even more controversy than scenes of them in bed
together male male relationships were characterized by nothing but sex yet
genuine love between men was frowned upon in most eyes and it was the first time
on screen when a loving kiss between two men was not intended to shock or
repulse in American Cinema it drew gasps from Spectators and as a result several
theaters refused to book the film at all however it provided gay moviegoers with
a mostly positive experience even if they were the only people in the theater
aside from the more serious gay films gays were popping up in small roles all
over Hollywood mostly As comedic foils perhaps most famously in Mel Brooks's The
Producers but all of this laughter was lost on the national gay task force which
issued a set of guidelines for Studios to follow including homosexuality isn't
funny use the same rules you have for other minorities if bigots don't get away
with it if they hate Catholics they they can't get away with it if they hate
gays stereotypical people do exist but if such a minority of any group receives
exclusive media exposure that is bigotry hmm television which is subject to the
regulation of the FCC and to the reaction of its advertisers to vocal public
opinion was more vulnerable to this type of activist pressure than was the
motion picture industry television programming which aired nearly 24 hours a day
was always in need of societal concerns to address homosexuality being one of
them a film must be a success but if a television show fails there is always
next week and another subject to try therefore experimentation was encouraged
pressure from Gay Liberation influenced television's approach to portraying
homosexuality for the American audience and it was successful in achieving a
more balanced and surely more prolific discourse on television than in film
Archie Bunker Norman lear's Charming bigot first encountered homosexuality in
1972 when he realized that one of his drinking buddies a former football star
was gay how long you know me 10 12 years yeah in all that time did I ever
mention a woman but what difference does that make you a bachelor so I know but
pastors there they're always acting kind of private exactly oh come on watching
from the White House President Nixon declared it distasteful because it made a
good man look like a fool it is unclear if Nixon was talking about Archie Bunker
or the football player that same year ABC made a significant step forward in the
portrayal of ordinary gay men on television that certain summer a two-hour movie
of the week presented the story of a divorced dad who chooses to tell his 14
year old son that he is gay when his son arrives for a weekend visit when the
father eventually gets around to describing the issue to his son the boy rushes
away unable to deal with it for gay liberationists The Narrative was a little
too soft while it earned glowing reviews in the mainstream press several gay
writers criticize it for being too hesitant and unduly cautious but with the
critical success of that certain summer the barriers seemed to come crashing
down for television by the mid-1970s queer characters had appeared on virtually
every sitcom drama and talk show in prime time TV All in the Family Rhoda mod
Barney Miller Mash The Bob Newhart Show and scores of others featured gay
characters the naked civil servant and the war Widow two spectacular television
dramas were uplifting depictions of the lives of lgbtq people both real and
fictitious both series instilled in its key characters a sense of history and
their position as strugglers for sexual Freedom both shows revealed a hidden
aspect of the gay experience through romance and humor although Quentin crisp's
story in the naked civil servant was not a gay liberationist's Dream by any
means gays greatly admired and respected crisp's defiant lifestyle when you're
being followed there are a number of rules to obey never look back [Applause] on
no account run gradually increase the pace to five miles an hour [Music] if this
does not deter him do not stop until forcibly stopped so stand still and look at
him it may work Studio Do You Think You Are be very polite it may work no one
really sir offer money it may work yet no gay Heroes emerged on the movie screen
at least not until the release of Dog Day Afternoon the film directed by Sydney
lament and starring Al Pacino is a complex and nuanced exploration of the queer
experience set during a bank robbery gone awry in Brooklyn the film tells the
story of Sunny a man who Robs a Bank in order to pay for Leon's Sunny's Partners
gender confirmation surgery Leon isn't given a feminine name in the movie FYI as
the story unfolds we learn more about sunny and Leon's relationship we discover
that Leon is a pre-op trans woman and sunny is willing to do whatever it takes
to support her including robbing a bank to fund the procedure this is a powerful
statement about the lengths that queer people will go to in order to support and
care for one another especially in a society that is often hostile and
unwelcoming the film also explores the impact of queer identity on the
character's relationships with their families when Sonny's mother comes to the
bank to try and talk him out of the robbery he reveals to her that Leon is a
trans woman her reaction is one of shock and disgust another important queer
theme in Dog Day Afternoon is the way that Sunny sexuality and gender identity
intersect with his working class background throughout the film we see Sunny
interacting with other members of his community including his friends and the
police officers who are trying to negotiate with him his working class
background is an important part of his identity and it's clear that he feels a
sense of loyalty and connection to his community something not often seen among
queer characters who were usually artists or working in fields of high esteem
like universities made for a budget of 3.5 million dollars it went on to gross
56 million dollars at the box office or 381 million dollars when adjusted for
inflation and was nominated for six Oscars including best picture bursting the
bubble of the assumption that movies with queer characters and themes can't
succeed but Al Pacino returned to gay Cinema five years later with cruising
which did not go over so well cruising was based on a 1970 novel by the New York
Times editor Gerald Walker that portrayed the process by which a New York city
policeman assigned to capture a psychotic killer of gay men becomes aware of his
own homosexuality and then commences killing gay men the gay characters in the
novel are all filled with self-hatred and hatred for the people who turned them
gay the blame usually falls on the first man with whom they had sex the killer
Intimates that the homosexual lifestyle is an inherently violent one the killer
in the film adaptation knifes his victims to death during or immediately
following sex and the film opens with a shot of a gangrenous severed arm
floating in the Hudson River Al Pacino's character a cop immerses himself in the
underground of heavy leather and sadomasochism as the film goes on he becomes
agitated and Restless a state brought about by his own sexual identity crisis
though his motives are never explored or explained when he finally locates the
killer he stabs him which puts the killer in the hospital under police custody
Pacino's assignment is over however another murder follows this time that of
Pacino's gay next door neighbor who was the only relatively happy gay character
in the movie it is implied in the end that Pacino himself had committed this
final murder and the film ends with him gazing at himself in a mirror in a
statement to the press the director screenwriter William friedkin of boys in the
band said that he was not sure who the real murderer was and that furthermore he
did not consider the murderer to be homosexual a more likely conclusion is that
friedkin deliberately obscured the identity of the killer either consciously or
unconsciously as a response so the wave of protests that arose in the summer of
1979 when he began filming gays who protested the making of the film maintained
that it would show that when Pacino recognized his attraction to the homosexual
world he would become psychotic and begin to kill so freedkin avoided that
situation by leaving the ending of the film relatively ambiguous yet friedkin
realized that his film said what gay activists claimed it said and he had a
disclaimer to all Prince of the film this film is not intended as an indictment
of the homosexual world it is set in one small segment of that world which is
not meant to be representative of the whole gay audiences around this time began
to see that Hollywood was willing to overlook successful queer films but would
admire themselves in their failures the most insightful and important films were
those which had been made in struggle by small groups of people and against
tremendous odds the producers and directors of the British film Nighthawks spent
five years preparing and Gathering funds for their film about a gay teacher who
spends his nights cruising in bars and discos and having one-night stands
Nighthawks offers an almost documentary style look into the evening cityscape of
the ritualistic life of a man who is becoming aware that he lives two lives the
dispassionate view of London gay nightlife allows a gay male audience to
experience the hunt as more than a passive spectator there is an uncanny feeling
that each member of the audience is himself cruising recognizing a look a
gesture a glance then realizing it is meant for the character in the film
through whose eyes we are looking no slick and Sensational Hollywood Peep Show
Nighthawks is a perceptive film with modest intentions and it succeeded without
compromising its scope for commercial reasons while William friedkin was on New
York streets filming the blood and guts Hollywood version of the gay underground
Nighthawks opened in New York and got what turned out to be better reviews than
cruising would get six months later and some queer filmmakers were willing not
just a step outside of the Hollywood System but all over it John Waters became
synonymous with the queer underground Cinema movement of the 1970s thanks to his
outrageous and subversive style Waters films are known for their irreverent
humor over the top characters and outrageous subject matter he has always been
drawn to the marginalized and the taboo and his films often explore themes of
sexuality gender and identity many of his films feature queer characters and he
has been credited with helping to break down barriers and challenge stereotypes
about queer people especially the messy ones and we love a messy queer waters's
film female trouble released in 1974 is a classic example of his queer Cinema
the film follows the story of Don Davenport played by the Divine Divine who is a
rebellious teenager with a troubled home life she runs away from home and
becomes involved in a series of crimes ultimately leading to her downfall the
film features a cast of characters that includes drag queens sex workers and
other Outsiders who challenge societal Norms of gender and sexuality another
notable film in waters Canon is desperate living the film takes place in a
fictional town called mortville where the residents are all social outcasts and
deviants the film features a cast of characters that includes a lesbian couple a
transgender woman and a group of militant feminists the film is a dark comedy
that explores themes of power privilege and oppression and most iconically
there's Pink Flamingos the queerness of this film is evident in the way it
portrays its characters and its themes and it remains a potent example of the
power of queer Cinema to disrupt and subvert all expectations Gentlemen of the
press get ready cause you are about to witness the biggest news event of the
year live homicide one of the most striking aspects of Pink Flamingos is the way
it portrays its Central character Divine is a larger than life figure both in
terms of her physical appearance and her personality she is a force of nature
unapologetically embracing her own queerness and challenging anyone who tries to
limit or control her her sexuality is fluid and she engages in relationships
with both men and women throughout the film in addition to its portrayal of
queer characters Pink Flamingos also explores themes that are Central to the
queer experience the film's focus on Outsiders and those who are marginalized by
mainstream Society is a recurring theme throughout with characters like Divine
and her cohorts living on the fringes of society and rejecting traditional norms
at the same time Pink Flamingos is also a celebration of queer culture and a
testament to the power of queer resilience despite the violence and degradation
they face Divine and her cohorts remain defiant refusing to be cowed by the
oppressive forces of society their queerness is a source of strength and a way
of connecting with others who share their experiences creating a sense of
community and belonging in the face of adversity content warning though Waters
films are also notable for their celebration of Camp a style that Embraces
theatricality and excess water's influence on the world of film and popular
culture is undeniable he has inspired countless artists and filmmakers and his
work has been celebrated for its subversive and irreverent humor his films have
also helped to pave the way for a greater representation of queer characters and
stories in mainstream media by challenging societal norms and pushing boundaries
Waters has left an indelible mark on the world of Cinema and Beyond these queer
Underground round films opened the minds of many who wanted nothing to do with
queer people throughout the 1970s we continued to appear on some of the most
popular TV shows in the world such as Dallas and mash and in 1979 came the
groundbreaking documentary before Stonewall the documentary combines archival
footage interviews with queer activists and Scholars and personal accounts to
Chronicle the history of the queer community in America it highlights the
experiences of queer people in different regions of the country and in various
spheres of society including the Arts politics and even Sports one of the
documentary's key strengths is its emphasis on diversity in the queer Community
the film showcases the lives of people like Bayard Rustin a gay African-American
civil rights leader who worked with Martin Luther King and Sylvia Rivera a
transgender activist who played a significant role in The Stonewall riots film
and television were now being used to show the world that we were people complex
and diverse and with a burgeon and queer political power structure rising up in
California New York and DC as well as a crop of new gay filmmakers beginning to
be noticed by Hollywood it seemed like we were ready to tear down those closet
doors for good and in the summer of 1981 pre-production had even begun on making
love a major Studio film from 20th Century Fox about a married man coming to
terms with his homosexuality and the love triangle that develops between him his
wife and another man but in that same summer a rare cancer began appearing in
gay men followed by a cluster of pneumocystis pneumonia cases in San Francisco
and New York and then gay men across the world began dying and suddenly
Hollywood's opinion of us didn't matter so much