---
date: 2023-04-15
title: America v. Homosexuality
parent: pW_RjbZYi1s
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "America's War on the Gays (and Communists)"
  - "The Lavender Menace (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
links: !!seq
  - "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V2--C3AQfSE"
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03/20230415+iJ3M_DhPlI0+America+v.+Homosexuality.webm"
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-public-records/America%E2%80%99s+War+on+the+Gays+(and+Communists).mp4"
notes:
  - hbomb

contributors:
  downloaded: $cite$TerraJRiley

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
{% assign tustin = site.data.cite.tustin2121 %}

<compare>
<credits class="desc">

[???]

</credits>
</compare>

{% include transcript-start %}

as the second world war ended and masses of servicemen returned home to America
having spent almost all of their time away exclusively with other men there
seemed to be an opening of the minds of the American populace when it came to
homosexuality not that it was an acceptable alternative to heterosexuality now
but that it wasn't the worst thing in the world usually under the caveat that it
would be something a man would grow out of how Italian but politicians who did
not serve their country in Europe or the South Pacific did not see this new
momentary mindset as a good thing instead they saw it as a corrupting influence
on America's men just as bad if not worse than the ghostly specter of Communism
they feared would make its way to the United States after American boys spent so
much time with Russians over in Europe and so began the Red Scare in Washington
DC as politicians led a crusade against actual and perceived Communists working
within the Beltway and it didn't take long for them to broaden their scope to
include actual and perceived homosexuals as well with almost 5 000 gay people
having lost their jobs in Washington by the end of the scare the lavender scare
became a Witch Hunt for Boogeyman just as terrifying as the Communists and as
Washington took aim at suspected Communists in Hollywood suspected homosexuals
in Hollywood were added to the growing Blacklist but before we explore the
government-sanctioned Manhunt against gays and lesbians in the 1950s let's hear
a word from our sponsor this video is brought to you by hellofresh making these
videos I spend a lot of time at my computer so it can become very tempting to
order in every night but with hellofresh's easy to prepare meals that even meet
my dietary needs I not only get to save money but get to eat a much healthier
diet while I do it hellofresh's boxes of fresh food are delivered weekly and you
can even specify how much you'll need based on how many people you're feeding
these boxes contain recipe cards that tell you how to cook step by step making
it easy for even people like me to cook as well as the fresh high quality
ingredients that are pre-measured in exact amounts to avoid food waste you can
choose your meals up to a month in advance and have a wide selection of choices
to choose from including low calorie low carb family style and vegetarian they
even have Gourmet options that feature premium ingredients like beef tenderloin
and lobster tail to get started with hellofresh today you can go to
hellofresh.com and sign up with my code hello James to receive 20 free meals
plus free shipping on your first box that's h-e-l-l-o-j-a-m-e-s for 20 free
meals and free shipping on your first order or you can just click the link in
the description start eating healthier today with hellofresh foreign [Music]
[Music] foreign [Music] in the early 20th century the United States experienced
a period of political persecution and anxiety known as the Red Scare there were
two different eras in American history that are collectively known as the Red
Scare both of which were marked by widespread anxiety over communism and other
leftist ideas the first Red Scare happened in the wake of World War One and is
rarely spoken about and the second occurred in the midst of the Cold War in the
late 1940s and early 1950s to a considerable extent the 1917 Bolshevik
Revolution in Russia was to blame for the onset of the first Red Scare it's no
secret that many Americans especially those in positions of authority were
worried about the emergence of the Soviet Union and the expansion of Communism
in Europe in response to this perceived threat the American government enacted a
set of laws intended to limit the freedoms of those who were either Communists
or sympathizers of the Communist cause the Sedition Act of 1918 was one of the
most notorious pieces of legislation enacted at the time because it made it a
crime to criticize is the government anyone suspected of being a communist or
Anarchist was subject to prosecution under these statutes regardless of whether
or not they had committed any real crimes the American Protective League was one
of the several private groups formed during the first Red Scare with the
authority to investigate and report on suspected's verses during the height of
the red scared the American Legion spearheaded a drive to identify and punish
suspected traitors after World War II tensions between the United States and the
Soviet Union grew once again sparking the second Red Scare during this time
communism was again considered a major danger to American democracy and its way
of life the inquiry undertaken by Senator Joseph McCarthy known as the McCarthy
hearings was one of the most important events of the second Red Scare McCarthy
claimed to have a list of people who were either Communist party members or
sympathizers and he used his position in government to initiate a series of
Investigations and interrogations to flush them out dramatic confrontations and
high profile charges typified the McCarthy hearings which had far-reaching
effects on American culture many individuals were punished for their suspected
communist links even though there was no proof to back up the claims Witnesses
were questioned under duress throughout the trials to get them to identify other
Communists who were under suspicion even if they were judged not to be communist
supporters many people were blacklisted and lost their employment as a
consequence of the proceedings because of McCarthy and his associates harsh
methods and disregard for due process the hearings became notorious but the
hearings came to an end in 1954 when McCarthy was censured by the senate for his
conduct during the investigations marking the beginning of the end of McCarthy's
political career the hearings are now widely viewed as a dark chapter in
American history in 1950 many politicians journalists and citizens thought that
homosexuals actually posed more of a threat to National Security than Communists
one columnist argued there is no record of comparable corruption in American
history in a national radio broadcast noted liberal Elmer Davis said it looks as
if the enemies of the state department and of the administration generally have
gotten hold of a more profitable issue than communism Senator Kenneth weary
asked his Senate colleagues can you think of a person who would be more
dangerous to the United States than a pervert and multiple of President Harry
Truman's top advisors wrote him memos stating the country is more concerned
about the charges of homosexuals in government than about Communists in the UK
it was just about social Purity yet in America the existence of gay men
specifically was somehow a matter of life and death historians of the McCarthy
period have paid surprisingly little attention to the lavender scare despite the
widespread worry and even Panic it caused at the time the significance of Party
politics and foreign policy in the emergence of the National Security State is
emphasized by political historians of McCarthyism anti-communism and the
establishment of the National Security State while the role of moral and
cultural concerns is downplayed anytime the lavender scare is discussed it is as
an afterthought of the Red Scare that is so obvious that it doesn't ever need
explanation the overlapping worries of Communism in homosexual quality have been
largely ignored in even the most recent examinations of McCarthyism both the
defenses from the right and criticisms from the left many people who supported
McCarthy back in the 1950s considered the systemic expulsion of gays from the
state department and other government positions to be his most lasting
achievement senator Joseph McCarthy alleged in February of 1950 that there were
205 Communists working in the state department that's a month under Secretary of
State John Purifoy said that the state department had permitted 91 homosexuals
to retire after this some said the president Harry Truman's government was
insufficiently concerned about the threat posed by homosexuals the Senate
started looking into homosexuals working for the government in June of 1950.
although the findings weren't made public until December throughout that time
there was a sharp rise in the number of government employees let go because of
homophobic harassment or discrimination when asked about quote sexual perverts
who have infiltrated our government in recent years Republican National chairman
guy George gabrielson claimed that they were perhaps as dangerous as the actual
Communists however being homosexual wasn't the only reason they were in danger
homosexuals were observed as security threats because they were believed to be
more vulnerable to Blackmail as top counsel of his Congressional subcommittee
McCarthy employed Roy Cohn who himself was homosexual and died of AIDS decades
later because of his attempts to protect his reputation he insisted that his
doctor treat him for liver cancer so at the same time that his immune system was
dying he was undergoing Cancer Treatments that destroyed what was left of his
white blood cells at the same time he also pulled what strings he could to get
on the experimental HIV medication that was still undergoing medical trials AZT
which destroyed his liver someday we will progress as a community to the point
where the only remaining Legacy of Roy Cohn is as the villain of Tony kushner's
iconic stage play angels in America but we're not quite there yet because Cohn
and McCarthy with the help of FBI director J Edgar Hoover who is also believed
to have been gay were responsible for the dismissal of thousands of gay
government employees and the intimidation of many of their political opponents
into Silence by spreading false allegations about their sexual orientation the
state department revealed that it had dismissed 425 workers due to charges of
homosexuality in the closing months of the Truman Administration in 1953.
McCarthy's anti-communist campaign often fused the second Red Scare with the
lavender scare by using allegations of homosexuality as a smear tactic reporters
were once subjected to the following statement if you want to be against
McCarthy Boys you've got to either be a communist or a  when proof of communist
activity was absent McCarthy allegedly used guilt by association by equating
communism and homosexuality with mental instability the general public and even
politicians had a common view that gays and Communists were both morally weak or
psychologically Disturbed as well as Godless and destructive to traditional
families for instance McCarthy openly discussed two individuals case 14 and case
62 on the senate floor as Communists who posed unsafe risks due to their
homosexuality he said that a high-ranking intelligence officer had informed him
that every active communist is Twisted mentally or physically implying that
those with the peculiar mental twists of homosexuality were more susceptible to
recruitment by Communists many of the male workers at the state department
started to feel uncomfortable even being there because of the Department's new
association with homosexuality they were quite adamant about not being seen in
pairs and they often introduced themselves with words emphasizing their
straightness hi I'm so and so I work for the state department and I'm married
and I have three children executive order 104.50 enacted by President Eisenhower
in 1953 prohibited gays from holding federal government positions and
established security criteria for federal employment as a direct result of these
policies hundreds of openly gay State Department employees were outed and fired
about 5 000 gay individuals including private contractors and military personnel
lost their jobs at the federal government as a result of this presidential order
the victims were not only fired from employment but also outed to the public
this presidential order expanded Truman's loyalty program by including sexual
perversion among the actions that disqualified a person from holding a federal
post many new rules and practices were implemented to identify and expel persons
who identify as homosexual lesbian or bisexual it was common practice to conduct
interviews and check for overt displays of homosexual biases as part of these
new methods to detect gaze people were judged guilty not just by connection with
those who frequented the same homosexual clubs as the suspects they may also be
questioned if members of their immediate or extended family had gay Tendencies
or gay connections by the mid-1950s similar repressive and oppressive policies
had been enacted in States and local governments as well expanding bans on
hiring lesbians and gay men to cover 12 million workers more than 20 percent of
the United States labor force all of whom were required to sign Oaths attesting
to their moral Purity in order to obtain or maintain employment but McCarthy's
crew of homophobes were about to have the sites trained on themselves when Roy
Cohn brought on G David shine as Chief consultant to the McCarthy staff
speculation arose that shine and Cohn had a sexual relationship during the Army
McCarthy hearings Cohn denied being closer than an ordinary friend to shine or
having any special interest in him Army Council Joseph Welch seemed to elude to
cohn's sexual orientation throughout the proceedings did you think this came
from a big Define you might be an expert on that yeah yeah I should say I should
say Mr Senator that a pixie is a close relative of a fairy McCarthy's unwavering
support for cone fueled rumors that the senator was either coerced by his senior
counsel or that their relationship went beyond professional boundaries McCarthy
often engaged in homosexual activities Nevada publisher Hank Greenspun said in
1952 and claimed that he was a regular at the White Horse Inn a Milwaukee gay
nightclub all this attention eventually led to Roy Cohn being removed from his
post alongside McCarthy and helped fuel McCarthy's own downfall in due time the
McCarthy period as a whole came to an end in the middle of the 1950s when Nicole
V young judgment in 1956 significantly reduced the authority to remove anyone
from the federal government with discriminatory grounds however the lavender
scare continued for many more decades the Florida legislative investigative
committee also known as the Johns committee or flick was another manifestation
of the lavender scare that endured established in 1956 the flick lasted until
1964 before being dissolved the committee's mission in Florida was to
investigate and fire homosexual Public School teachers carrying on the lavender
scare and spirit if not entirely in practice and it wasn't until the Obama
Administration that military service for openly gay people was allowed since the
don't ask don't tell policy was just another executive order 104.50 under a
different name but though the lavender scare unofficially came to an end with
the fall of McCarthyism after multiple Decisions by the Supreme Court defanged
the senator and left him nothing but a paper tiger The Fear and Loathing toward
homosexuals as well as accused Communists survived much longer in Hollywood even
before McCarthy began his Crusade producers in California had been blacklisting
anyone even remotely connected to Communism thanks to pressure from future
president of the United States Ronald Reagan who was then the president of the
Screen Actors Guild many Hollywood professionals were called to appear before
the house on American Activities Committee in October of 1947. it was announced
that the committee would look into allegations that communist spies and
supporters had planted propaganda in Hollywood movies Walt Disney spoke first
during the proceedings Disney testified that Communists posed a severe danger to
the film business and identified many former employees as possible Communists in
contrast other leading Hollywood figures including director John Houston and
actors Humphrey Bogart Lauren Bacall Judy Garland and Danny Kaye organized the
committee for the First Amendment to protest the government's targeting of the
film industry of the people working in Hollywood that the house on American
Activities Committee was interested in many were accused of being members of the
communist Party USA of the initial witness list of 43 19 declared that they
would not give evidence 11 of the original 19 were questioned by the panel on
Monday October 27th the hearings last phase began and members of the committee
for the First Amendment traveled in from throughout the country to participate
only one of the 11 unfriendly Witnesses writer Bertolt Breck agreed to speak
with the committee after which he fled the country ten others declined claiming
their right to free expression and assembly under the First Amendment the
question are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist party was
one which they flat out refused to answer the committee formally accused these
ten of contempt of congress and began criminal proceedings against them in the
Full House of Representatives the house on American Activities Committee
hearings failed to turn up any evidence that Hollywood was secretly
disseminating communist propaganda but the industry was nonetheless transformed
producers and Studio heads were now on the watch for any and all anti-American
activity fearing further investigation from the government especially ones that
might lead to government censorship which they'd only narrowly avoided decades
before so as Hollywood always does they chose to self-censor before being told
to this began a Crackdown on any directors writers or actors who might be
communist or gay The Echoes of McCarthyism were sounding loudly in the Hollywood
Hills and the association between gay and communist were inseparable by then and
as mentioned in previous episodes Hollywood was more or less stuffed full of gay
men and women working in any one of a multitude of roles in the industry this
resulted in multiple well-respected directors moving to Europe and sending many
more up-and-coming and well-established actors even further into the closet
suddenly films about the fear of extraterrestrials became hot tickets in
Hollywood as a narrative device to help instill fear of anything even slightly
different to the masses of the growing Suburban America these monsters from
outer space were Communists gays and people of color these aliens could be
anything and everything John and Martha were afraid of which thanks to Senator
McCarthy was a lot of things but no theme was more prevalent than the alien
shapeshifter the ones who could live alongside the normal people corrupting them
from within Communists coming for your husbands gays coming for your sons the
Red Scare and the dread of communist infiltration into American culture are
commonly seen as metaphors in the 1956 science fiction classic Invasion of the
Body Snatchers the film has also been seen as a homosexual allegory by any
number of reviewers and Scholars throughout the years the film's narrative
revolves around an extraterrestrial invasion of Earth and the subsequent
infiltration of soulless carbon copy humans developed in pods the Pod
inhabitants begin to symbolize as the film unfolds a society that is driven by
uniformity and tries to eliminate individuality and uniqueness this uniformity
and Conformity theme has been linked to the gay experience in the 1950s ever
since many gay individuals in the past were pressured to conceal their
identities and mask their sexual orientation because of the widespread stigma
associated with being gay at the time the film's depiction of the pod people
paints them as robotic drones devoid a feeling and individuality in addition the
film's characters are a misfit crew that the perceived conventional Society
Rejects and ignores people who insist that something nefarious is occurring are
sometimes branded as insane or paranoid similar to the experiences of gay people
who were frequently disregarded and mocked by the larger society the characters
in this story are members of a minority group who are trying to persuade the
world of a threat that only they can see Invasion of the Body Snatchers is
undoubtedly a film that reflects the societal anxieties of its time and can also
be seen as a powerful gay allegory by exploring themes of Conformity
individuality and marginalization the film speaks to the experiences of many gay
people who struggle to find Acceptance in a society that sought to erase their
differences Invaders from Mars features a similar plot to Invasion of the Body
Snatchers David the film's protagonist is a creative and sensitive young man who
is ridiculed and excluded from school he has a difficult time relating to people
even his own father with whom he has a tense relationship many members of the
queer Community especially around the time the film was released have
experienced feelings of alienation and exclusion similar to those shown in the
film actor Arthur Franz who plays David's father in the film has been speculated
to be homosexual in real life Morris ankrum who was also thought to be gay plays
Dr kelston an investigator of the UFO phenomena there are aspects in Invaders
from Mars that may be seen via a queer lens even if that wasn't the film's
original intent from the underlying ties between the male characters to the
overt themes of possession and Invasion the 1939 film nanochka has also been
interpreted by film critics as an allegory for lesbian desire and love firstly
the character of Nina played by Greta Garbo is a Stern and serious Soviet Envoy
who comes to Paris to supervise a group of three bumbling comrades who have been
sent there to sell Jewels seized during the Russian Revolution Nina is initially
portrayed as cold and unfeeling but she begins to thaw as she falls in love with
the Charming and carefree count Leon dalgol played by Melvin Douglas this
Dynamic of a strict and buttoned up woman being seduced by a more carefree and
flamboyant man is a common Trope in Classic Hollywood films but it also mirrors
the expectation that more manly or serious women would lighten up and go
straight eventually the Assumption among many was after all that the only thing
stopping a lesbian from being a happy Homemaker was finding the right man
finally there is the character of Irma played by Bella Lugosi Irma is portrayed
as a flamboyant and Theatrical figure with a campy and exaggerated manner of
speaking and gesturing while the character is not explicitly identified as queer
the fact that Lugosi himself was bisexual and often played roles with homoerotic
undertones has led some viewers to interpret Irma as a coded representation of
queer desire and from a completely opposite direction we have the notorious Plan
9 from Outer Space from the infamous filmmaker Ed Wood while the film has long
been considered a cinematic disaster it has also been celebrated for its campy
subversive qualities in particular many critics and Scholars have interpreted
the film as a queer allegory one way in which the film can be seen as a queer
allegory is through the character of the alien leader Eros Eros is portrayed as
a flamboyant effeminate figure with his distinctive attire makeup and mannerisms
he moves with a graceful almost poetic quality and his speech is melodramatic
and Theatrical his characterization is so exaggerated that it goes well beyond
mere stereotyping and instead creates a queer icon that challenges and subverts
traditional gender Norms another aspect of the film that can be interpreted as a
queer allegory is its underlying critique of Conformity the plot revolves around
the alien's plan to destroy Earth because they view it as a threat to their own
culture and way of life this can be seen as a commentary on the obsessive forces
of Conformity that queer individuals have often faced the aliens desire for
uniformity and sameness can be read as a metaphor for the societal pressures to
conform to heteronormative standards and expectations and even the internal
expectations of the queer Community finally the film's low budget campy style
can be seen as a celebration of the marginal and the underground in the context
of queer culture Camp has often been used as a way to resist and subvert
dominant cultural norms the film's deliberately bad acting special effects and
overall production value can be seen as a queer refusal to conform to
traditional Hollywood standards or maybe I'm reaching a bit with that one but
suffice to say the 1950s were a time of strict social conformity in America the
culture was dominated by the ideal of the nuclear family where a husband worked
and provided for his wife and children while the wife stayed at home and took
care of the household any deviation from this Norm was considered dangerously
deviant and subject to social ostracization this of course included
homosexuality which was widely seen as a mental illness or a moral failing gay
people in the 1950s faced significant depression from the dominant culture as
well as legal and social sanctions homosexuality was illegal in every state and
those who were caught engaging in same-sex activities could face imprisonment or
institutionalization in mental hospitals in this culture of fear and secrecy gay
people were forced to hide their true selves and Lead double lives whereas
suspected communist agents chose to lead double lives many gay men and women
were also forced into marriages with the opposite sex in order to maintain
appearances and avoid suspicion these marriages were often unhappy and
unfulfilling for both partners and they often ended in divorce or estrangement
this further reinforced the idea that homosexuality was a choice and that gay
people could choose to be straight if they wanted to gays and lesbians were also
subject to violence and discrimination in many areas gay bars were the only
places where they could meet and socialize however these spaces were often
raided by police who would arrest patrons and subject them to violence and
humiliation These Bars were actually rated more often than suspected communist
hideouts gays and lesbians were considered easier targets by the police and
since the government believed a queer person could easily be turned communist
arresting them was killing two birds with one stone the policing of gender norms
and the emphasis on Conformity made it nearly impossible for gays and lesbians
to be themselves and live fulfilling lives it wasn't until the Stonewall riots
of 1969 and the subsequent gay rights movement that things began to change in
America but Hollywood would begin to ease up on the depiction of gay people in
the 1960s but mostly in coded ways but even with deep deep coding there was a
catch anyone confirmed to be gay or even heavily coded to be wouldn't have it
easy and to live a life true to themselves they might just have to die for it
[Music] as we close out this episode I'd really like to thank all of our patrons
it's only because of you that videos like this are even possible YouTube isn't
all too friendly when it comes to pushing lgbtq content in fact in most cases
they try their best to keep it hidden so our amazing patrons are the only reason
this channel keeps chugging along thank you all so much from the bottom of my
heart thank you um if you'd like to become a part of this seriously amazing
Community you can do so for as little as a dollar a month at the link in the
pinned comment alright now I'll let their credits roll and I'll see you soon for
unrequited episode 4 dying to be queer [Music] foreign [Music] thank you [Music]
foreign [Music] foreign [Music]