---
date: 2023-04-29
title: How Spoilers Are Ruining Everything
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "How To Stop Caring And Learn To Love Spoilers"
  - "Spoiled Culture (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
  - "The Last of Us"
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
  - "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qNxoyHlVM48" # Reuploads channel
description: "a video essay on <xyz>."

cite:
  clips: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
this video is brought to you by Squarespace The Last of Us TV show on HBO was
one of the most anticipated TV shows of recent years based on the hit video game
of the same name The Last of Us follows the story of Joel and Ellie two
survivors in a post-apocalyptic World ravaged by a deadly fungal infection the
show garnered a lot of attention for its high production values talented cast
and faithful adaptation of the game's story however one of the most significant
aspects of the show is its representation of queer characters one of the most
prominent gay characters in The Last of Us is Bill in the game bill is a loner
and an expert in surviving in this infected World however his past is revealed
to the player through notes and diary entries scattered throughout the game
where it is revealed that he had a partner named Frank who was infected Bill's
story is tragic and his portrayal in the game is sympathetic and nuanced
avoiding the common stereotypes the queer characters are often subjected to the
TV show expands on his character's backstory in episode 3 we see the full story
of Bill and Frank their relationship is depicted in a heartfelt and authentic
manner a long lasting relationship between two men who create a sort of paradise
for themselves in the middle of the horrors of the infected world the show also
explores the trauma that bill experiences as a result of the idea of losing
Frank because in this apocalyptic world neither of them could imagine living
without the other but Bill and Frank are only in one episode a mostly
self-contained episode that particularly homophobic viewers could skip over
without missing out much but with Ellie they have no such luxury Ellie is really
the main protagonist of the show she's not only a well-rounded character with
complex motivations and storylines but she's also a representation of queer
youth that has been rarely seen in mainstream media the representation of Ellie
as a queer character in the show is important because it may help to normalize
queer identities and create a sense of sympathy and understanding for queer
people among the straight audience but unlike many queer characters in media
Ellie's sexuality is not a defining characteristic of her personality but rather
just one aspect of her identity it is not used as a plot device or a means to
further the story in a negative way instead her tragically short relationship
with Riley is portrayed as a natural and beautiful part of her life and unlike
Bill and Frank whose episode can be skipped over Ellie's queerness isn't going
anywhere and will only become a more prominent aspect of the ongoing story in
the second season when she's with Dina by centering the only real romantic
relationships in the show around Bill and Frank and Ellie and Riley the show is
pushing back against the idea that heterosexuality is the only acceptable form
of romantic love so why was I so annoyed by the online discourse around the show
and I don't mean the get woke go broke crowd who were Furious that the show's
ratings just kept getting better and better every week even as it got gayer and
gayer I'm talking about the people who complained incessantly every week about
spoilers as a gay I've never much cared for spoilers especially when it comes to
Media about gay people because there's only one of two possible endings they
live happily ever after or at least one of them dies not much to spoil there but
the privilege of being able to have more than two ending options sure has seeped
into the minds of an awful lot of the mass audience creating a fungal hive mind
chanting no spoilers no spoilers no spoilers no spoilers so let's talk about
some spoilers but first how about some self-promotion and a word from this
video's sponsor Squarespace this video is brought to you by Squarespace building
a site with Squarespace is a great way to build your brand and reach a wider
audience whether you're a visual artist photographer a writer a video producer
or work in any creative field it's vital to have a site that you can use to help
build your brand on your own terms Nick and I have had a presence on social
media for a while now and obviously this channel but with certain sites looking
like they're going the way of audiences who don't actually care about spoilers
we thought it about time to make our presence felt away from the Bird app using
Squarespace is incredibly intuitive and easy to use tools we've built the James
Summerton Channel website featuring a Blog where Nick and I write about topics
that probably wouldn't make for a full video a special section where you can
check out preview chapters of my upcoming novel as well as check out Nick's
novel gentlemen's club and using squarespace's video hosting features we're able
to give you access to videos that YouTube made us remove and spoiler alert you
can head to squarespace.com right now for a free trial and when you're ready to
launch your site go to squarespace.com James S that's j-a-m-e-s-s to save 10 off
of your first purchase of a website or domain start showing the world how
amazing you are today with Squarespace [Music] foreign [Music] foreign [Music]
the language of spoilers is a relatively new term though it has roots in
Hollywood culture famously The Simpsons once depicted a flashback to 1980 with
Homer and Marge leaving a screening of The Empire Strikes Back while beside a
line of people going into the theater Homer blunderously remarks wow what an
ending Huda thought Darth Vader was Luke Skywalker's father oh spoiler alert by
the way Darth Vader is Luke Skywalker's father and while surely that experience
is annoying the main distinction of this spoiler is that at no given moment were
you ever expecting there to be a Twist in the plot this seemingly
straightforward narrative about a Plucky Farm Boy becoming a space Knight is
flipped on its head Luke Skywalker's innocent moral values are suddenly brought
into question when the audience realizes that he is actually derived from the
story's symbol of evil specifically when it comes to making Darth Vader Luke's
father George Lucas spent a great deal of time struggling with not just how to
pull this off but also whether or not he should these movies were not explicitly
made for children but he deliberately won wanted them to be accessible to all
ages he worried that if Darth Vader was Luke's father the children would find
that too frightening but he did want shock factor to be a huge part of the
reveal make no mistake shock value is a viable literary tool this was a period
of time where movie trailers in the 1970s would more or less synopsicize the
whole damn movie first of all the movie script for Empire Strikes Back did not
read that Darth Vader was Luke's father the only people who knew the truth were
Lucas himself and director of incursioner almost immediately before shooting the
scene kirschner pulled Mark Hamill aside and told him what the script was
actually going to say meanwhile everyone else on set thought that Hamill was
just really chewing the scenery when he was reacting to finding out that per the
script Obi-Wan killed his father that's not true it seems that this degree of
secret keeping is the only real thing Disney learned from Lucas's rule book on
building a franchise Empire the Star Wars franchise in part due to episode 5's
Mass cultural shift and what we could expect out of a Blockbuster movie has
become obsessively rooted in withholding information from an audience that now
expects to be surprised which even by episode 7 it was at a point of
ridiculousness Anthony Daniels who portrays C-3PO in the series remarked that he
had never been on a movie set with that much secrecy this is an actor who had
been one of the franchise's first fans who saw illustrations of his character
and instantly fell in love and yet even he could not be trusted with the full
script as per the structure of these trilogies there was a lot riding on Star
Wars episode 8 where everybody was expecting there to be a Twist Rey is Luke's
daughter or Obi-Wan's granddaughter or a clone of Padme or related to one of the
other petite brunette women in the franchise snoke was a clone of the Emperor or
Darth Plagueis him himself Emperor Palpatine's Sith Master but the twist here is
that there is no twist meanwhile a huge chunk of the fan base gets pissed off
because it's not the twist that they were expecting do you want to be shocked by
a Twist or not spoiler alert by the way Rey doesn't have special parents except
then it got retconned that she did because JJ Abrams doesn't know how to write
engaging characters in drama so he substitutes for an arbitrary sense of mystery
but we'll get to that in a moment yet this hype around spoilers that followed
every new installation of the Star Wars franchise since the Disney acquisition
was not present during the prequels in part I assume because they were prequels
and everyone more or less knew how they would end Lucas was also doing very
little to try and conceal that Chancellor Palpatine was Darth Sidious who would
become the emperor Ian McDermott was credited just the same as he was in episode
6. Lucas wasn't hinging the entire prequel trilogy around making the audience
speculate who the emperor was he wanted you to know what was going on so you
could spot his methods of manipulation on the characters who were unaware of
what what his plan was which nobody really gives the credit to McDermott for
carrying the prequels on his back the way he did in episode 3 we go from Happy
helpful politician to I am the senate in no more than 10 minutes and somehow
it's completely believable that turning point in the narration wouldn't have
been possible if Lucas spent the prior four hours of screen time trying to
conceal who the emperor really was from the audience this is a case study on why
dramatic irony is still a very relevant method of building tension because you
don't spend those first two movies looking for a Twist you get to have a sense
of dredge whenever Palpatine is on screen you're watching the movie instead of
expecting a shock to happen however the specific phrasing of spoiler wasn't
present for Darth Vader's Infamous confession and Empire Strikes Back at least
not in a broadly applicable sense of cultural awareness and it would have been
much easier to keep away from spoilers in a world before social media as a
matter of fact the first time that no spoilers garnished a strong cultural hold
was not for a movie it was for a book one of her books because everything comes
back to her these days this is all her fault spoiler alert Snape kills
Dumbledore now I don't really have anything to say about her anymore and I don't
want to start a discourse on her either so I'm not even gonna put this in the
SEO of the video but for reasons that can only really be known through a
comprehensive historical understanding of our culture in the late 90s and early
2000s the Harry Potter series permeated so deeply that it was an anomaly in
publishing that had never been seen before even before they were adapted into
movies by the time the sixth book in the franchise the Half-Blood Prince was
leading up to release the hype was at an unprecedented level and for those who
can read a 500 page book in a matter of hours like my online boyfriend at the
time fans took to the internet immediately to find other people to discuss the
whole plot with others who can read that fast in the process they spoiled one of
the most important narrative redirections in the entire series when the primary
figure of mentorship is murdered by one of the longest-running personal
antagonists to the principal protagonist and by all means doing this was a bit
of a dick move and by all means perhaps readers should have been a little more
sensitive to those who cannot read so fast or who cannot for whatever reason
purchase a hardcover book when pre-orders exceeded the number of printed copies
upon release however rather than opening a discussion about when does a new
thing stop being new or where do we create safe spaces to talk about these new
things the word very quickly became don't talk about it at all because while the
murder of Dumbledore might not be the first spoiler it seems to be the Catalyst
for what has become known as spoiler culture now Snape killing Dumbledore isn't
a bad narrative decision a good story always has something to shake up the
status quo but the Legacy around this particular spoiler quickly became a bit of
a joke in itself regardless of the fact that there were any number of other
mysteries in the book namely who was the Half-Blood Prince spoiler alert it was
Snape whether you were at the time a fan of Harry Potter or not within the
fandom it was as if this detail was the singular quality of the story that
mattered as if learning this information outside of experiencing it for yourself
while reading it rendered the entire plot pointless does it really invalidate
the entire story though since then spoiler culture has pushed us into this kind
of fervent tight-lipped secrecy how do we enjoy media if the purpose is to just
consume it as fast as possible to avoid spoilers where audiences refuse to
engage in any discussion about media for fear of having it spoiled conversely
what if audiences sole method of engaging with media is to speculate about what
may happen I bet it's Mephisto what happens to the rest of the filmmaking
process if a project is exclusively constructed around the media's ability to
generate hype around secrets and twists how can we discuss a fandom's desire for
early birds wanting to discuss and analyze their media with others who have not
yet seen this media wanting that same engagement but without wanting spoilers
what about media for which there's nothing really to spoil but audiences still
act like Minor Details of a story are spoilers that ruin everything we've got
people complaining about spoilers for Dune and Lord of the Rings and any other
range of movies or books that have been available for public consumption for
decades what's next complaining about spoiling that Odysseus reconnects with
Penelope spoiler alert in some versions of the myth he kills her does this mean
there's no point in reading the Odyssey classical birds and writers used to
include a prologue to their work that explicitly stated what happens at the end
of the story and yet they crafted stories so renowned that they outlasted
regimes kingdoms Empires and entire civilizations having a shift in narrative
Direction seems to be a staple of media my issue is with spoilers not with
twists or turning points it used to be that a spoiler referred to the act of
sharing information in a story that is better left being experienced firsthand
now it seems that spoilers refers to elements of the story itself which provided
a broad enough definition could be nearly anything about a movie spoiler alert
turns out that Dr Hannibal Lecter is actually a Serial killing cannibal spoiler
alert the Titanic sinks spoiler alert Wednesday has a dance scene this is
setting a very restrictive culture for people who want to publicly engage with
the media they enjoy and I can't quite tell apart the chicken from the egg here
our audiences suffering such a weak narrative Constitution that there is an
anaphylactic reaction to any component of a story that they have not experienced
firsthand yet or is our climate of corporate generated media becoming so
dependent on formulas of narrative twists that they have nothing to offer
audiences if they're not dangling a mystery box over their head on a string
[Music] narratively in film there are two different ways to describe the way
that a story can suddenly change a plot twist and a turning point people these
days seem to think that they're the same thing and scream spoilers if you so
much as mentioned the slightest plot progression a plot twist is an unexpected
and dramatic shift in the storyline that alters the viewers understanding of the
plot it can come in many forms such as a character's sudden betrayal the
revelation of a hidden motive the introduction of a previously unknown character
or the death of a previously well plot armored character plot twists can be used
to create suspense challenge the audience's expectations or provide a surprising
ending when they're done well in contrast a turning point is a significant
moment in the story that changes the direction of the narrative but doesn't
change everything about the movie strictly in literary terms a turning point is
when the character makes a decision that alters the direction of the story in a
way that cannot be reversed this is an important element of dramatic tragedy
where a character's direct action prevents this story from ending on a happy
note spoiler alert Romeo kills tibult while both plot twists and turning points
can be important elements in storytelling they serve different functions and
have different effects on the audience plot twists are often used to create a
moment of surprise or shock they can come out of nowhere and in many cases
remove a lot of the rewatchability value of the film if the whole movie is built
on the twist why bother watching it again turning points on the other hand are
almost always necessary to advance the plot and change the direction of the
story when needed another key difference between plot twists and turning points
is the timing of their occurrence plot twists usually occur towards the end of
the story often at the climax or resolution and are designed to shock the
audience and hopefully have them leaving the cinema talking about it there's an
old adage in filmmaking the quality of the movie doesn't matter only the quality
of the last 15 minutes because that's what people will remember turning points
on the other hand can occur at any time in the story and are used to create
momentum and tension more often than not they occur within the first half of the
movie for instance spoiler alert the shooting of Vito Corleone is a pivotal
moment in Francis Ford Coppola's Masterpiece The Godfather the scene takes place
pretty early on in the film and sets the stage for the rest of the story the
shooting itself is abrupt and shocking it's a turning point for the characters
because it marks a shift in power dynamics within the Corleone family Vito is
the head of the family and has always been in charge however after he is shot
and left critically injured his eldest son Sunny steps up to take control this
leads to a bit of a power struggle between sunny and Vito's youngest son Michael
who is at first first reluctant to get involved in the family business Sunny's
aggressive leadership style though leads to a war with rival families that
eventually leads to him being killed Michael's eventual takeover of the family
having all of his enemies assassinated on the day of his baby's christening sets
him on a path of corruption and violence that we follow throughout the Godfather
Part 2 and part three I've seen way too many people online complain about having
the Godfather spoiled for them when the movie's quality has absolutely nothing
to do with turning points in the film there's a reason this film is held up as
one of the quintessential masterpieces of Cinema there's far more to watch it
for than just surprises contrast that with the 2012 horror movie Cabin in the
Woods the film sets up the classic horror movie tropes of a group of college
students heading out to a remote Cabin in the Woods for a weekend of fun only to
encounter a mysterious and terrifying force waiting for them however spoiler
alert the entire scenario has been staged by a group of technicians working for
a mysterious organization the horror is not real but rather a simulated
experience design to appease ancient gods while this twist is a clever
subversion of horror movie conventions it's such a 180 that there's not much you
get out of it watching it a second time the first half of the movie is a
straightforward horror film with a suspenseful atmosphere of fun dialogue more
character development for the ones who usually get killed off first and a strong
sense of dread the office workers leave the audience wondering what's going on
but they aren't that distracting from the deliberately paint by numbers plot
however once the twist is revealed the tone of the film becomes a much more
comedic meta commentary about horror movies in general while the shift can be
entertaining it also means that the audience is no longer invested in the
horrific elements of the film or the characters it had been setting up the sense
of dread is replaced by a sense of Detachment knowing the ending when you watch
The Godfather does not ruin the experience of watching The Godfather but knowing
the ending of Cabin in the Woods why even bother watching it now plot twists
aren't evil a well-executed plot twist can keep the audience guessing and on the
edge of their seats this is because it creates uncertainty about the outcome of
the story which creates a sense of anticipation and excitement certainly there
are many movies with plot twists that are absolutely worth re-watching we need
to keep in mind that it's the twist that becomes spoiled the twist is not the
spoiler however the issue is when a spoiled twist spoils the whole movie it can
detract from the overall experience of the story and leave the audience feeling
disappointed or cheated what's the point of an audience getting emotionally
invested in a story if they are made aware of the only worthwhile element of
that story another problem comes if the twist undermines the logic or
consistency of the world if the twist contradicts established facts or character
traits it feels contrived and leaves the audience feeling unsatisfied for
example if a character is actually another character who the fans have already
guessed is that character but whom the filmmakers swear up and down is not that
character spoiler alert my name is Kai that's just lying like some Creator whose
only real creative trick is to establish mysterious contrivances that keep the
audience guessing and whose panicked response to audiences figuring it out is to
insist that they're wrong in order to give them a reason to buy a ticket so when
does a spoiler not spoil a movie I used the example from The Empire Strikes Back
where the famous twist has reached the point where most children have heard the
line referenced before they've ever seen the movie I can't think of many ways
that someone could go into watching episode 5 completely blind in this day and
age and yet this film is frequently held up as a science fiction Masterpiece it
should be a demonstration that knowing what happens in a movie doesn't mean that
the movie itself is spoiled how does this spoiler continue to function as a
successful twist first of all nobody was expecting there to be a Twist in the
first place there's so little of the movie's content that hinges on the
relationship between Darth Vader and Luke Skywalker even up until the point
where Darth Vader spoils Luke's parentage we're under the impression that he
wants to capture Luke to bring him to the emperor the prior hour and a half is
spent embroiled in a discussion about military operations against an
overwhelming Force poignant and subversive philosophical debate and acute
political discourse it's difficult to spoil a movie when the highlights of the
story are contained in debate and conversation Darth Vader's Revelation is a
fantastic five minutes out of another fantastic two hours what specifically
makes this twist so good is that the twist is more significant for the
characters the characters affected by the plot are entirely invested with why
this Revelation is so significant either directly or by proxy not only does the
audience know what emotional effect this has upon Luke but we also see Darth
Vader now as a human figure rather than the more machine than man perspective of
him take a look at some of the other most infamous twists in Hollywood history
such as Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho spoiler alert Norman Bates dresses up like his
dead mother and murders people and then blames it on his mom nearly everybody
knows this the movie had a shot for shot remake in 1998 in a prequel TV series
the movie still remains one of the Masterworks of cinematic horror and it's not
because you're so shocked when you learn what happens it's a combination of
tension performance and some of the most iconic melding of visuals and Orchestra
ever put to film while Norman Bates being the Killer is certainly a shock it is
not the only twist in the movie audiences of the day would have even said that
it was a far cry from the primary twist the character of Marion crane is
portrayed by Janet Lee a close approximation would be like comparing her to
Margot Robbie today a Hollywood actress at the peak of the industry and although
she is in all the marketing she's killed 40 minutes into the movie another
reason why the twist doesn't spoil the movie is that it adds to the overall
atmosphere from the beginning psycho is a movie that is designed to make
audiences feel uneasy the black and white cinematography the Eerie score the
unconventional structure all work together to create a sense of foreboding the
Revelation that Norman Bates is the killer only adds to this atmosphere of dread
by the time the twist comes audiences are already on the edge of their seats and
they're ready to be shocked the fact that mild-mannered baits is capable of such
violence is all the more horrifying because of the mood that has been
established throughout the whole film the film spends its duration earning that
unsettling payoff it's a natural conclusion to the story that is supported by
the events of the film Hitchcock carefully plants Clues and red herrings
throughout the movie leading audiences down One path before revealing the truth
it's not a mystery for mystery's sake there are no lingering questions dangling
over the audience's head in a false belief that this is the only way to engage
the audience Hitchcock's soft touch invites the audience into the mystery when
the mystery is solved it means as much to the audience as it does to the
characters the twist for the sake of a Twist came about in recent years thanks
to in most part two filmmakers M Night Shyamalan and JJ Abrams Shyamalan became
famous for his last minute twist in the sixth sense when the audience discovers
that Bruce Willis was dead the entire time spoiler alert what's unfortunate is
that M Night Shyamalan got so big off of this movie that he spent his entire
career trying to recreate that famous twist that put him on the map though
nunner is renowned for twists as JJ Abrams and his goddamn Mystery Box the
mystery box is a literal box that Abrams purchased from a magic shop when he was
a child allegedly it contained various magic tricks and props but he never
opened it the Box became a symbol for him of the power of mystery and the
unknown honestly this story sounds just about as contrived as most of his movies
it's got that kind of feel-good sensibility that you'd expect to find in 80
Spielberg movies and their CopyCats in filmmaking the mystery box concept refers
to the use of mystery and ambiguity to create interest and suspense in a story
even if the writer doesn't know what the end result will be Abrams has stated
that he believes in the power of mystery and that withholding information can
create a sense of anticipation and excitement for the audience that he's more
interested in questions than answers most notoriously he used this box I mean
mystery box when he took over the Star Wars series after Disney bought the
rights for my very depressed George Lucas in JJ's sequel Trilogy the use of the
mystery box was criticized for being overused and poorly executed for example in
the force awakens he introduced new characters like Rey and kylo Ren and
deliberately left as many questions unanswered about them as possible while this
initially created excitement and speculation among fans it also left many
feeling unsatisfied and frustrated when those questions were either left
unanswered or answered unsatisfactorily by the end of the mess known as the rise
of Skywalker by that point many critics who lauded episode 7 argued that the use
of the mystery box was used as a crutch to cover up the plot holes or weak
writing rather than being an integral part of the storytelling the lack of
coherent planning and consistent vision for the sequel Trilogy also contributed
to the perception that the mystery box was being overused as a gimmick rather
than as a legitimate storytelling device and they did absolutely everything they
could to protect their precious twists and spoilers Han dying wasn't really a
twist for anyone who knows anything about Harrison Ford's career and his opinion
of Star Wars but it shocked plenty of people nonetheless the emperor still being
alive was a nonsensical spoiler that they even used in the advertising for
episode nine but the fact that Rey was his granddaughter was kept very close to
the chest it screams that a filmmaker has little faith in their work that they
hinge your enjoyment of the movie entirely on a Twist leaving you shocked but
what's left after the shock it didn't take audiences many repeat visits to the
theater to come to the conclusion that episode 7 kinda lacked anything other
than Nostalgia on your first viewing you get the rush of feelings but rushing
emotions give diminishing returns this is the same reason why many people who
may have at one point named their pets after characters from the MCU are now
avoiding anything with that logo on it like the plague you get to a point where
you think am I actually excited for this movie or do I just do this out of habit
which leads some people to then question if I divest from this media am I
actually missing anything that's one thing for Marvel movies but provided how
staggeringly successful they are were almost all of Hollywood is doing
everything it can to cash in on that success by doing the same thing what
happens to the quality of our media when the largest media producers are only
gauging the quality of media on whether there's something they can conceal from
their paying audience [Music] some people are just naturally good at picking up
on hints and cues in either a movie itself or indications within the ads if our
entire cinematic creative process is constructed around creating surprises for
the audience then there isn't going to be a whole lot of ways for them to
connect with say a Marvel movie I've seen a relatively recent shift where many
people have simply stopped engaging with movies and may avoid movies with
straightforward plots because they feel that there's no point in watching them
if there's no twist never mind when it comes to say movies like everything
everywhere all at once or the menu or even Dungeons and Dragons there's nothing
really to spoil even take a look at Mega successful smashes like Avatar 2 and
the Super Mario Brothers movie there's no Grand Revelations here one is a
Showcase of CGI spectacle and the other is a love letter to a beloved video game
franchise that was done dirty in the early 90s as far as spoilers go any
surprises about these movies or either things you cannot really describe spoiler
alert hot dog fingers or our turning points that occur within the first third of
the movie with each of these examples the reason you're meant to watch it is to
watch it in fact one of the most surprising things to me about the menu and
maybe this is because of my obsession with Hannibal is that the movie isn't
about fine dining cannibalism spoiler alert it's not about fine dining
cannibalism the real spoilers for that movie are about the themes and Concepts
that drive the plot because the way that film expresses those ideas are so
detailed and nuanced that they cannot be expressed in any singular instance
without context and in fact even if I read you a synopsis of the movie I'd still
tell you to go see it because there's just so much about it that can't be put
into words like they say the living is in the journey not the destination which
I would really like to see a return to that sensibility because I'm starting to
see this process of generating hype around secrecy as a contributing factor to
an overall dip in quality in media in general namely in Disney but Disney owns
half Hollywood by now so even just a decline in that corporation's output is a
substantial chunk and the corner cutting is tempting why do you need to put your
best foot forward when you can get Butts into theater seats by promising a grand
twist that you must see this movie to experience especially if you need to see
this twist in order to have any hope of understanding what's going to happen in
future projects it's the interconnected Universe declining quality pipeline this
isn't even something connected exclusively to superhero movies or other specific
genre Blockbusters the Batman was a murder mystery built around the question of
who is the Riddler spoiler alert it was Paul Dano he was on the Press tour the
surprising parts of the movie were the performances from Pattinson and Kravitz
If This Were a Disney project or anything directed by JJ Abrams I can definitely
see it not being out of the question for them to keep Dano hidden inside of a
locked trunk between the last day of filming and the premiere and based on some
of his interviews he might even be into that if the executives on a project
believe that there is nothing more to this media Beyond how it can shock and
surprise an audience why do they need to spend a buck on anything else
quantumania certainly took a critical hit for just not paying attention to
visuals in recent memory most of Disney's new projects are shot on special
projection screens to make sure no spoilers get leaked however actors can't
interact with the set and there's so much light being projected that it's a
nightmare for cinematographers and it just looks bad and while we may accept
that there is an entire collection of films whose executive oversight does not
believe that they have anything to offer but 200 million dollar surprises
unfortunately this bleeds out into other movies some as I mentioned do not
really have anything to spoil in the first place but people still may act like
they do but others as I mentioned are based on existing media that has been
publicly available for some time I'm sorry but Dune has been absent the 60s if
you care enough about the property it shouldn't be a surprise to you that Paul
ends up starting a holy war and is kind of depicted as a massive jerk no not
spoiler alert if it matters that much to you read the damn book because people
who have read it are going to want to talk about it the whole universe isn't
going to set classic movies and books on the shelf and wait for you to have time
to get around to it because other people have there are three ways to avoid
spoilers you can keep away from online spaces until you've consumed the media
you want or you can selectively choose to engage with media which is not
constructed around spoilers or you can accept spoilers and continue to engage
with media anyway unfortunately there is no real way to avoid spoilers while
existing in online spaces there's always going to be some jerk who somehow found
a leaked script for a new episode of a Star Wars streaming series and blabbers
about it on Twitter while there is some responsibility for people to not leak
any plot twists in a movie other people really can't be held accountable for
your emotional reaction to spoiled content and on the flip side there needs to
be a greater effort on the creative side to generate content for which spoilers
are irrelevant and no you don't need to make a simple straightforward movie to
really do that in recent memory knives out and its sequel Glass Onion
demonstrate that you can make an engaging murder mystery where it's abundantly
clear who the Killer is from the very beginning but even if you call the shots
that who's the murderer part of it isn't the reason why you're meant to be
watching these movies are about rich people being horrible people the mystery is
just a vessel for that even the mystery box the idea of deliberately holding a
mystery over the audience's head isn't an inherently tainted narrative trick if
you know how to make a good movie you can pull it off one of the
quintessentially great movies of all time has a mystery box the whole point of
Citizen Kane is what is rosebud the final word of the titular Charles Foster
Kane it takes the entire movie to figure out what it is and in fact these days
most people know what Rosebud is before they even see the movie spoiler alert
it's his childhood sled and if you think for a second that that spoils the movie
and therefore there's no point in watching it then quite frankly it's your loss
but knowing this doesn't speak to the reasons why this film is held up as an
Exemplar of excellence in cinema knowing the name of the sled doesn't answer the
question why should I watch this movie it's a movie about innocence a fall from
grace and the corruptive power of success the sled has nothing to do with it and
everything to do with it and you don't know how that's possible unless you watch
the whole movie there is an onus on audiences to not put twists and plot beats
on a pedestal of importance to such a degree that they let these things spoil a
movie if these things spoil a movie then watching the movie itself spoils the
movie you know what happens doesn't that spoil it for the second time you watch
it why not use the power of your dollar to support media that can't be spoiled
by a leaked script hopefully this will put pressure on Hollywood to begin
putting some oomph back into their narrative impact and other aspects of the
creative process Dungeons and Dragons shows us that not having a spoilable Twist
doesn't spell the end of the Blockbuster you can make fun engaging movies
without the diminishing returns of a surprise twist even if you all didn't go
see it yes I'm judging you as much as the primary responsibility should be put
on the corporate production side of Hollywood to provide us with the kind of
quality that you'd think would be in demand for the cost of a movie ticket these
days this is a slow moving beast and we are the ones who have to mobilize and
begin to ask for more and sometimes I think we forget that we do have that power
[Music] it's amazing that people alive today get to say that we're living
through a golden age for us it seems we're living in the Golden Age of
Television commonly credited to have begun with Breaking Bad television and
streaming services especially experienced an unprecedented creative expansion of
the kinds of content that could be put on the small screen and in many ways the
big screen was given a run for its money through not only content but also the
use of newly available high definition and 4K cameras to introduce cinematic
lighting and dynamic range to TV from Breaking Bad We got Hannibal from Hannibal
we've now got Interview with a Vampire who needs Oscar base nothing exemplified
this quite like Game of Thrones the HBO series adapted from George RR Martin's
game-changing Song of Ice and Fire book series and nothing else has ever
exemplified just how far a once in a lifetime television phenomenon can go out
of its way to almost completely tarnish its reputation forever and it's because
of spoiler culture when the showrunners ran out of the source material because
Martin takes so long to write some fans noticed a marked decrease in writing
quality the pacing picked up too fast the methodical development was replaced
with fan service payoffs granted many also thought that at this point they'd
earned some of that but I don't the problem for everyone else came when it
seemed like fans were beginning to predict how how the series was going to end
up until then the showrunners had enjoyed a strong reputation for presenting the
unexpected the book series was famous for killing off characters who seemingly
should have had plot armor and for shocking political plots that completely
upset what seemed to be a plot projection spoiler alert lots of people die don't
get attached but sometimes they do get resurrected so when fans of the series
began to connect the dots between certain characters who did end up having a
kind of plot armor it's like the showrunners didn't know how to generate tension
anymore their solution just flip the script whenever someone figured it out I
don't know why they thought this was a solid plan because fan theories about the
books were going to inevitably bleed over into the discourse of the series so
certain things were rushed perhaps these events were meant to happen but didn't
happen the way they should have and it ended up being that the only real twist
was twisting the plot's arm to guarantee that expectations would be subverted
rather than being ambivalent to an expectation and just making good art as I
said for years fans had predicted the end of Martin's books and he knew it some
of them he claims are a dead match for his outlines but his response to that was
that he wasn't going to change his plans because some people had figured them
out Game of Thrones should be a case study in how something so culturally lauded
can go awry if the sole purpose is to surprise people and in the end it
certainly was surprisingly bad because I feel they thought so little of Their
audience that they expected everyone would be satisfied and overjoyed Aid as
long as there were twists a quantity of twists turning points Revelations
Exposition dumps sudden entrances twins separated at Birth waking up and it was
all a dream and anything in a plot that can be concealed from an audience does
not a good story make it's just drama but this is also just one aspect of the
filmmaking process and to hold a work of media's quality up to these twists is
to overlook nearly every other aspect of Creation in film for which people have
dedicated their entire lives to making these artistic and often unrecognized
contributions to a good movie costumes sets special effects are just some
examples performances from actors and the way that specific line readings can
add layers to a character that just isn't there in the script but also
cinematography Direction choreography when needed sound editing and engineering
and camera work if learning a plot beat spoils a whole movie for you it's
spitting in the face of everyone involved in this and a producer who builds a
whole movie around a single plot beat is spitting in the face of these people
too you don't have to reinvent the wheel to make a good movie or series the best
thing to surprise your audience with is love and care for the content you
produce you know exactly how it's going to end because they read the book or
they played the game an amazing storytelling Journey isn't about what shocks you
but what makes you care and that is what happened with The Last of Us [Music]
thank you thank you foreign [Music] [Music] foreign [Music]