---
date: 2022-08-13
title: How Disney Tore Down The Owl House
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
topics: !!seq
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-videos-backup"
# description: "a video essay on...?"
notes:
  - hbomb

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
{% assign tustin = site.data.cite.tustin2121 %}

<compare>
<credits class="desc">

[???]

</credits>
</compare>

{% include transcript-start %}

this video is brought to you by my patrons if you'd like to support my channel
and get access to extras like audio commentaries a patron exclusive podcast and
uncut videos you can join by clicking the link in the description the bulk of
content on this channel is about queer representation and because as i have
mentioned numerous times the walt disney corporation is playing a ruthless
cutthroat game of being the world's number one producer of media in general my
ire is naturally drawn to that believe it or not i'd really like to not talk
about disney so often i'd love to make more videos about representation that
doesn't suck i would like to be able to celebrate what we could have and do have
instead i spend most of the time explaining how it's okay to ask for more than
the flaky lean in queerness that we've all been gaslid into praising but the
problem with a dwindling number of large studios capable of juggling the kind of
budgets you need for multimedia productions is that there are too few cooks in
the kitchen fewer cooks mean the menu gets slashed and we don't have anyone else
to go to if we don't like what we're being served so we end up groveling at the
feet of these studio executives and believe them when they say they're doing the
best that they can and then putting them on these pedestals when they roll out
the bare minimum if we weren't living in such a monopolistic world we wouldn't
have to talk about disney we could just let the free market do its thing and
give other studios a chance to corner the market on all ages queer content queer
inclusive blockbusters queer characters and genre films or even lighthearted
adult-oriented queer content that isn't about a reductionalist display of pathos
and suffering as the sole defining element of queer validity but in spite of
disney's obsession with cow towing to its own brand like that's the anthill that
it's going to die on there are a few times they have given the gays everything
they want and while i was making content about disney's shortcomings on
representation i was informed that the owl house the 2020 animated series on the
disney channel absolved disney of all the queerbaiting queer phobia that i was
accusing them of and even when i wasn't talking about disney at all i was
reminded of the owl house over and over and over and over and so i watched it go
me i guess i really wasn't ever expecting to hate it i just wasn't watching it
because i'm an only child which means when someone tells me to do something i
don't do it just because i don't like being told what to do i was probably going
to end up watching it in the end eventually probably would have waited for a
third season so i could properly binge it but disney decided to be a big old
dick and soft cancel the show by cutting the final season down from the 19 to 21
episodes to three and this cancellation came in spite of the show's growing fan
base and increasing word of mouth popularity the only reason i know about the
existence of the owl house is due entirely to people talking about it not a
single disney ad and there isn't much that manages to slip past me on social
media these days so disney managed to produce media which was openly queer
kid-friendly adult accessible and which the gays didn't really have a problem
with and didn't really stir up much of a controversy from queer opposition which
seems to be exactly the kind of kickback they're hoping to accomplish every time
they throw a variable lesbian into a pixar movie or a sassy gay-coded sidekick
into a live-action remake and every time they try that they basically project
headlines to the moon to let everyone know about it and every time we come away
feeling unseen and every time they promised next time is when they're actually
going to give us the real first queer character all the while leaks out of pixar
indicate that all that queer coding we've been reading into we're actually once
intended to be a part of the picture and yet the mouse left it on the cutting
room floor yet when they got exactly what they seemed to be looking for with the
owl house they tore it down so time to conduct a psychological assessment on a
corporation to attempt to figure out what could possibly be going on in there
[Music] the owl house was approved for a second season in 2019 before it even
premiered this kind of two-season safety net no doubt helped contribute to the
writer's confidence in brazenly depicting queer identities and media directed
toward a juvenile audience and even though season one only really served up some
gay dads background gay prom dates and strong overtones of lesbian panic that
must have been a bit too queer for disney i say only because it really is the
least a piece of media can do to represent us but it still leaks above what most
media offers should we be grateful for getting offered a sip of water after a
week in the desert hmm so what's going on in the owl house well the titular
residence itself is a sentient building which is or is not controlled by hoodie
who is a sentient door doorbell doorman door knocker security system and best
friend the primary resident eda is an incredibly powerful witch swindler an
all-around miscreant who is wanted by the law because she refuses to conform to
an arbitrary standard of rules and guidelines she lives with a strange adorable
dog demon first named king last name of demons he may be a pet or a roommate or
an adopted child ida makes her living off the grid by using an interdimensional
portal to snag garbage from the human world to pawn off to magical residents of
the boiling isles as novelties and one day a piece of garbage named luz wanders
through lose is a people not garbage that that was a joke people aren't garbage
most people aren't garbage lose is a girl who has her head if it's not in the
clouds it's somewhere else she's a little bit not like the other girls to the
point where her mother decides she needs to be shipped off to a special secluded
summer camp that will teach her how to be normal it's not analogous for a
certain kind of therapy camp at all i swear instead she chases ita's staff owl
through a briefcase portal into the boiling isles a magical place horrible place
creator dana terrace's direct inspiration was narnia imagined by herronius bach
the whole of the isles are the corpse of a long dead titan because the titan was
magical all life evolved on the islands to use this magic and it's mostly
unpleasant yeah we don't have weather we have plagues luz decides she would
rather stay here and learn to be a witch from eda instead of going back home
where she would have to be in a summer camp where she'd be shoved into a neatly
labeled box which would deterministically establish how she can contribute to
normal society and if lose is going to get labeled she's going to put that label
on herself damn it humans do not typically live on the boiling isles however
though the residents know of humans and though the sum of human monsters and
myths come from the boiling isles there is quite a hubbub about a human living
there did you know that humans now barbed wire to their kids teeth but why maybe
to make them magnetic all things on the boiling isles can use magic to an extent
but as humans have not evolved here they lack the physiological organs needed to
use it luz however manages to figure out a way to make magic out of glyphs and
joins a magic school much to the dismay of eda who loathes conformity there are
some very clear parallels between eda and luz and the boiling isles can be seen
as a microcosm of our social culture of conformity all witches by mandate must
join a coven and when they join a coven they are branded and their access to
magic is limited to only the single type of magic the coven represents ita
refuses to limit her potential priding herself on being the strongest witch on
the isles and she looks down on the witches who conformed to these covens they
ida claims are choosing to limit their own potential for the sole purpose of
keeping up social conventions chaotic pansexual energy for the win and there are
punishments social and legislative for non-conformity especially for those who
refuse to relegate themselves only one label of identity i mean magic the real
plot of the series revolves around the topic of expression and identity the
primary villain of the series enforces this coven hegemony strictly and with an
iron fist emperor bellows the only coven which is permitted to practice all
forms of magic is the emperor's coven where he recruits witches whose unbridled
talent he needs to enforce his will but who he can still control with promises
of his favor eda represents the most dangerous threat to his totalitarian rule
an exceptional witch who does not need him to be as powerful as she is
non-conformity is tolerable to authority when insignificant but those who are
exceptional can challenge authoritarian rhetoric while emperor belos's plots and
centuries-old schemes are the underlying narrative of the show the bulk of each
episode features lew's going on magical coming-of-age adventures frequently
featuring her friends willow and gus and then later amity who was once a rival
and later a girlfriend with an actual animated gay kiss towards the end of the
second season yes but there is a great deal of hand-holding and cheek smooching
leading up to that true to form these girls who like girls spend a great deal of
time doubting whether the girl who is displaying obvious signs of affection
actually likes them and after they started dating both luz and amity vocalized
the word girlfriend about once each episode which while gratuitous is a great
way to remind the audience that they are in fact girlfriends because in spite of
the blushing the dancing the hand-holding the gay panic there was a contingent
of the audience that still felt that the pairing came out of nowhere and even
though the show chooses to depict queerness textually it also goes out of its
way to continue including subtextual queerness too to me this is clear in the
character designs themselves look closely and you may spot a number of lgbtq
flags in the show not being flown from flagpoles or hung up in the windows
however lose's primary design seems to sample colors from the asexual flag which
alternately may be sampling from the demisexual colors however with the addition
of her cloak she wears bisexual colors eda's sister lilith vaguely resembles the
asexual flag at least in season one however she was also described as arrow ace
by people working on the show looking at king i always felt that his eye colors
were a weird choice there could have been lots of ways to make his eyes pop but
this seemed weirdly specific if we're following this pattern of flag colors
though his eyes themselves resemble the intersex flag or his color scheme as a
whole matches the non-binary flag and furthermore amity's hair color change
bears a resemblance to the genderqueer flag this may be a bit of a stretch given
that there is a they them character on the show eat his ex reign whom all
characters automatically default to their chosen pronouns the flag colors are
likely nothing more than a nod that contributes to the overlying queerness of
the show as a whole maybe on a dare someone told dana that they can't possibly
use the queer flags as a color palette for an entire animated series because
even if they aren't strictly written as queer the show does tend to lean on
queer flags for palettes for instance eda's color palette seems to be sampled
from the lesbian flag she's not a lesbian herself she references a train of
ex-boyfriends but i bet if you asked her how she identified she'd just say i'm
eda the owl lady the most powerful witch on the boiling aisles i mean she does
kind of have these rogue queer aunt vibes right the kind who's late to family
functions who's the subject of family gossip who somehow always manages to land
on her feet and who hides things in her hair the kind who you feel safe asking
if she can hook you up with a fake id and will not only deliver but take you to
your first bar some of us are lucky enough to know her so yes the owl house is
very unafraid to brazenly depict queerness while at the same time leaning on
queer coding and unspoken queerness to indicate that the boiling isles are much
more lenient when it comes to sexual and gender identities this is a world after
all where people belong to various categories of demons some of whom do not
appear to have any gender traits in a world where there are sentient tentacle
monsters chest-faced centaurs and tenelonoza it would make sense that getting
upset about pronouns wouldn't have a place in common discourse however what
helps the owl house rise above being just a cartoon about queer people is that
it also offers additional commentary about a queer state of affairs how luz
escapes from one system of oppression and learns that this world of magical
freedom has a system of oppression all its own and for this the owl house takes
an increasingly anti-establishment stance which is not directed at singular
jerks but rather discusses root causes of societal oppression as a whole but is
this anti-establishment sentiment why disney a massive corporation with weird
internal rules and cultural standards canceled the show likely not because just
be yourself has been the media mantra of disney since the renaissance in the 90s
so if the owl house has broad strokes messaging that matches the disney brand
and if it has animation and design that matches the disney brand and if it has
an array of characters and presented themes about family values that match the
disney brand and if aside from that the show boasts stellar ratings and prestige
which very much cements the disney brand as presenting excellence in children's
media then why on earth did they cancel it who knows why who could ever know we
know [Music] generally disney channel animated shows tend to run for fewer
seasons when compared to their network counterparts look at adventure time and
steven universe which clocked in at 283 and 160 episodes respectively and
compare them to popular disney channel shows like gravity falls 41 episodes and
star vs the forces of evil 77 episodes once upon a time disney even had the 65
episode rule where no animated show on the disney channel could go past 65
episodes it's an outdated business practice that disney clung onto a lot longer
than most producers with 65 episodes one episode could be broadcast each weekday
reaching the 65th episode at the end of the 13th week 13 weeks is one quarter of
a year four 65 episode shows can be broadcast in a single calendar year in the
same time slot it took shows like gargoyles and ducktales to end that trend but
that doesn't mean disney doesn't use bullcrap reasons to cancel shows today
terrace previously offered some insight into why the owl house wasn't renewed
for a full third season which boiled down to a frustratingly simple reason that
had nothing to do with reviews all good or viewership also good someone decided
that the show didn't fit disney's brand they just wanted to be done with the owl
house and this was the perfect chance to do that even getting the consolation
season 3 episodes was difficult apparently hard to say i wasn't allowed to be
part of any conversation until i was just told at the end of the day there are a
few business people who oversee what fits into the disney brand and one day one
of those guides decided the owl house just didn't fit that brand the story is
serialized barely compared to any average anime lmao our audience skews older
and that just didn't fit this one guy's tastes that's it ain't that wild really
grinds my guts boils my brains kicks my shins and all the things it sucks but it
is what it is while we have had issues airing in a few countries and are just
straight up banned and a few more i'm not gonna assume bad faith against the
people i work with in l.a don't worry dana i'll assume the bad faith for you so
it was one guy's taste one guy one guy who could be that one guy who could that
one guy be though not officially confirmed i'm willing to bet it's this guy bob
chapic the current ceo of the walt disney company who earlier this year made a
name for himself by not speaking out about florida's don't say gay bill until it
was too late to do anything about it and was infamously forcing disney and pixar
filmmakers to cut queer content from their films chabick made his name in the
company by running the disney parks many feel he ran them into the ground
disenchantment with the parks from die hard disney lovers has been at an
all-time high ever since he got control of the parks let alone the company
massive price increases in everything from food to ticket prices to
accommodations have made a disney vacation more difficult to afford than ever to
the point where a suite at the disneyland hotel costs more than staying at the
palace of versailles in france at the same time the company has eliminated perks
like the formerly free magical express transportation to and from walt disney
world from the orlando airport genie plus has made standby lines regularly
exceed an hour for rides that used to average 15 minutes even bob iger the
former disney ceo and the man who hand-picked jay pick has had regrets several
disney sources and people who are familiar with iger's thinking have indicated
that iger has spent the time since announcing chapic as his successor regretting
what he has called one of his worst business decisions according to a former
disney executive iger has said that he didn't realize chapick was such a novice
when it came to handling complex issues like talent management and political
battles and that chapic was arrogant and uninterested in other people's opinions
he's also not fond of the fact that chapic is a crypto enthusiast who wants nfts
to become particularly important parts of disney going forward he's even started
consulting with warner brothers on how to rebuild the dc eu that's how much he
wants chapic to fail chapic has also come under harsh criticism for treatment of
cast members that's what disney calls park employees many full-time park
employees struggle to provide food and basic necessities for their families
earlier this year abigail disney grand niece of walt disney and granddaughter of
company co-founder roy disney released a documentary about the walt disney
company's obligation to do better for its employees which you'd think would have
got on chapic's nerves but at least in public he seemed unfazed profit has been
his main defense he took over as ceo of the company on february 25th 2020 as the
pandemic was just starting to be taken seriously as a significant global concern
less than a month later he took the unprecedented step of closing all disney
theme parks around the world in florida the shutdown lasted from march to july
of 2020. in california it lasted for 13 months in the first fiscal quarter of
2022 chapic reported 7.2 billion dollars in revenue from disney parks
experiences and products boasting all-time high revenues rick munarez a
financial analyst said that while posting that kind of profit is helpful it's
not the largest indicator of how well the company is doing overall since disney
was the worst performing stock of the dow 30 in 2021 mostly due to the fact that
disney plus under chapic's guidance isn't set to turn a profit until at least
2024 at best which means he needs to squeeze every penny out of every other part
of the company that he can in the meantime so that he doesn't look even worse to
stockholders but the cuts and what some fans perceive as unabashedly putting
profits over people has led to discontentment among fans reaching such a fever
pitch that it's extending far beyond the echo chamber of disney blogs when you
spend the most amount of money you've ever spent and you go and you have a
substandard experience worse than before and this is multiplied by the fact that
it's so crowded these are all things that kind of entice this extreme
dissatisfaction theme park expert scott smith told the washington post earlier
this year isn't it while the theme park expert is a job chapic though is in a
unique position as far as ceos of multi-billion dollar corporations go disney is
first and foremost in the business of making money but unlike almost every other
giant corporation it doesn't want to be seen that way by the general public
people feel as though they have a personal investment in disney because disney
markets itself as having a personal investment in the happiness of its fans by
creating the idea that disney is a safe place for people a place where they will
feel loved and supported the same way that they do or want to in their own homes
they create a higher standard of relationship between the company and its
customers that's why disney doesn't use that term at all rather customers are
guests always but it's also why because chapic has been so transparent in his
monetary motivations and so apparently blind to guests unhappiness so many of
the people who have bought into this idea feel like he's letting them down and
because fans of the company are losing faith so are many who work for the house
of mouse it's an odd situation for the company to be in over the last three
decades disney has only had two ceos one of whom oversaw the disney animation
renaissance and the other oversaw disney becoming the biggest media company in
the world enough goodwill among fans was built up over those last three decades
that many people defaulted to let disney have it they'll do it right anytime a
particular franchise was floundering and now people are looking at disney with
derision so what does all this have to do with the owl house well i just wanted
to point out how big of a tool bob chavic is his reluctance to come out against
the don't say gay bill really rubbed me the wrong way but the real reason i'm
talking about him is timing you see the owl house first started airing in
january of 2020 and was renewed for a second season before the first episode
even aired that's how much faith disney had in the show and it was well founded
faith with the show receiving widespread critical acclaim multiple awards and
shockingly solid ratings with a saturday morning cartoon especially in the age
of just sitting your kid down in front of netflix and letting their brains melt
the second season premiered in june of 2021 but in may of 2021 a month earlier
disney announced the cancellation of the show giving it three 42-minute long
episodes to wrap everything up instead of a proper full third season what was
the big difference at disney between january of 2020 and may of 2021 well the
ceo went from being a guy who argued for gay marriage legalization even
threatening to stop donations to the obama re-election campaign in 2012 if the
president didn't come out in favor of it to a guy who kept silent when the
florida government started passing legislation that erased queer people from
classrooms that's quite a drastic shift and where season one saw lose and amity
have an obvious crush on each other season two went right ahead and made them a
couple introduced a non-binary former and likely current love interest for eda
and introduce hunter who many believe is being set up for a gay pairing with gus
which is a little problematic given the four-year age gap but hunter's a little
bit emotionally stunted from his lifelong tenure in the magical hitler youth
boot camp and gus only ever associates with older kids so let's just say they're
really good friends and maybe even roommates someday the further queering of the
show in season two probably didn't sit well with a ceo who openly cares more
about profit than people and sees queer characters as tokens to never be
confirmed and only really exist when the golden goose known as kevin feige says
so so before season two even got off the ground he clipped its wings i know it
hasn't been confirmed that he was the one who made the final decision but it
reeks of him so he's getting the blame and season two is even better than season
one with even more critical praise and an increase in the ratings as teenagers
and even adults started to find the show and fall in love with its characters
but that didn't matter because it was already canceled dead witch walking
because it didn't fit the brand well what the hell is the disney brand anyway
[Music] time for me to use that marketing degree simply put a brand as a promise
to your customer when describing a brand it's tempting to simply list the
attributes of a business describe the product line or point to the logo and
tagline but a brand is more than that it's a unique benefit for your customers
the walt disney company presents itself as more than just a business it is an
authentic american icon an honest-to-goodness rags to riches story of one man
who struck out and made it big and did everything he could to crush unions along
the way but the walt disney company's promise has always been to be bringers of
joy as walt said we need to create joy not for children but for the children in
each of us the brand identity of any brand consists of the way the company
identifies itself through the products or services sold and the image it
presents in the case of disney the company is named after walt disney proper
name he even inspired the logo of the company through his handwritten signature
which is part of the brand identity of disney to this day there are entire font
families based on walt's handwriting this direct connection to its founder is
also a part of the disney brand as the walt disney company is one of the very
few corporations in the world with a founder mythology now disney is unique for
a lot of reasons but this one is kind of bonkers disney has fostered a clear
sense of identity built just as much around walt disney himself as it is the
media it produces other corporations and even studios tend to lean away from
using their own founders as a mascot for various reasons a person is singular
and a person can be fallible but more importantly a person is boring who stands
for this company just a dude okay people pack bond easier with a mascot like
tony the tiger walt disney perpetuated a sense of personality to the company
it's easy to strip the fursuit mascot away and realize that it's just a sad old
capitalist man working for kellogg's but with disney you push the cardboard cut
out of mickey mouse down and there's kindly mr disney it's an extra layer of
deception that walt fostered in his own lifetime we don't think about the
founders of corporations look at 20th century fox before the merger fox studios
was founded by william fox both the g and m of mgm were named for samuel goldwyn
and louis b mayer disney not only wants walt disney to remain relevant in a
modern discussion of media but almost venerates this man in a way few
corporations do of their founders the only companies i can think of with a
founder mythology are like apple but steve jobs notoriously gave zero f words
about how other people perceived him very early on walt disney established the
production company as a family brand family owned family operated family safe a
movie studio that would produce films the whole family could enjoy from the
youngest children to the oldest grandparents enchanting young kids and bringing
adults back to their childhoods he's quoted as saying you're dead if you aim
only for the kids adults are only kids grown up anyway one could also say adults
are just kids with bank accounts disney offers multiple promises to these
families a disney resort promises that you will enjoy your time it's one of the
most important promises of its company a disney film promises to be enjoyable by
the whole family without excluding anyone with content wholly too mature for
kids or too juvenile for adults the disney experience promises to be available
to everyone no matter how rich or poor if you can't afford to take your kids to
the parks there's always the movies and the disney company promises not to break
these aforementioned promises and in doing so will allow you to build memories
to last a lifetime those are the promises that the disney corporation has been
making to customers since the 1930s in the year 2000 an extra promise was added
disney promised to tell stories for every child no matter where they're from
what they believe or what color their skin is enter the disney princesses
becoming the most diverse bunch of skinny girls on a toy shelf but when you ask
a disney executive what their brand is they will simply say stories old stories
new stories fairy tales myths legends parables and epics stories for the whole
family stories that exemplify what is right and just whether disney ever
actually was as all-inclusive and family-friendly as they'd like to pretend is
up for debate the whiteness of the company's movies didn't start to change until
the 1990s at which point the female characters of color were universally
fetishized jasmine pocahontas esmeralda all women of color all far less clothed
than snow white sleeping beauty bell or cinderella so if disney's brand is
family friendly animated entertainment as well as inclusivity i would imagine
that the owl house would fit their brand perfectly it's got magic fun characters
appeals to kids and adults and as toyetic as all hell and yet it didn't fit the
brand has their brand changed or is it that the inclusivity part of their brand
was never meant to include girls who kiss girls or boys who kiss boys or people
who don't identify as either let's say for a moment that disney actually does
love their queer fans and the owl house really did just not fit the disney brand
because it has changed well what the hell is the disney brand today [Music]
there's little you can do or say to convince me that there was a rational reason
for the owl house's cancellation good ratings good reviews are one thing but the
fact that the show attracted an older audience is another thing entirely and a
citation for the program's cancellation was the older demographic it was
attracting the mindset is that if the wrong age bracket was tuning into the show
product lines directed at six to eleven year olds would be less inclined to buy
ad space but there's nothing saying that disney couldn't adapt and put the show
at a later time slot for more appropriate consumer demographics there's also
nothing saying that the executives wouldn't be aware that disney plus was in
late stage development and realized that adult audience cartoons tend to do well
on streaming services there's simply no reason why you don't want an incredibly
toyetic show directed at an adult audience who have an abundance of expendable
income there is after all a sub industry at disney geared at marketing their
princesses for themed weddings and funerals yes funerals times like this make it
seem like the executive thought process at disney is powered by a single gerbil
on a wheel but even in a quote-unquote bad time slot the owl house got decent
ratings as it was and in the end the rationale given to terrace was that her
show didn't fit the disney brand which at first seems self-apparent enough that
it almost makes sense and then you think about it for more than two seconds and
it's like what brand because it's true there was a very carefully crafted media
environment that was meticulously kept by walt disney but that brand also
carried on after walt passed away even when the company was nothing but the
disney vault and straight to video flops and cheap sequels but today does it
still carry as much weight now that disney has as many ips under its belt as it
does can we say that everything fits into the brand does it expand the brand in
which world does the disney brand include a they all die at the end movie like
rogue one allusions to alcoholism in iron man 2 or in doctor strange 2 with
marvel's favorite mom gone slasher monster not to mention the wanton violence
across either franchise and the way that either franchise struggles to fit into
the disney brand when they try to force it referencing the book of boba fett in
the titular character's newfound no killing rule and even today disney has left
their princess brand by the wayside for some time the princess and the frog
faced upfront criticism over representation and stunt voice casting and took
some time to find a fan base tangled struggled to find an audience and while
frozen did have a massive upfront success it did so while distancing itself from
the typical princess formats to be a movie about two estranged sisters healing a
bond but to make these kinds of features with these kinds of messages ones which
can appeal to older audiences as well as the targeted younger ones the studio
has to be willing to let narratives dive into conflicts which are not strictly
in line with the media environment that walt would have approved of and while
the company is still married to its archaic image in order to keep up with the
modern mediascape there are a handful of aforementioned instances where certain
medias rest uncomfortably outside the strict parameters however as disney adds
so many exceptions to the disney guidelines is the brand itself becoming too
vague the more disney expands alters and permits free radicals to perpetuate the
modern disney culture the more holes get poked into the brand itself what
exactly is the disney brand today i see the collapse of the disney brand
beginning with the pirates of the caribbean yes it was inspired by a ride at
disney world disneyland the one in florida however the film let itself go into
uncharted waters michael eisner then ceo was sure that the film would be a
disaster the film had violence alcoholism and a no small amount of horror the
stakes were real and there was a palpable threat to the main cast for the first
time disney produced a non-animated feature that was able to reach cultural
permians and it worked with the pirates franchise bringing in over 4.5 billion
dollars and if it worked once it would work again i can argue that disney had
two brands their established brand and a developing brand for their live action
stuff one which would dry in an older audience who may scoff at new disney
properties one that was more adventurous daring and not quite so safe and ever
since then disney has been moving its animated and live-action media to more
overlapping spaces to the point where i suppose we can say that the disney brand
exists in the same way that the british empire exists it's more of a concept
that still occupies a couple of its territories but when referring to the
british empire we reference the thing that it was at its peak so when bob chapic
says that the owl house doesn't have a place on the network because of the
disney brand is he referring to the disney brand of old or the disney brand of
today if the disney brand is the scapegoat for why the owl house got thrown
under the bus then i think it's interesting to examine what about the owl house
is so incompatible because the owl house honestly feels more like classic disney
than a lot of the other content that's going up the only thing that is
particularly outstanding in this regard is the comfort the show has in depicting
various gender expressions and identities namely the gay stuff the series did
take its time to build up the in your face queerness strategically waiting until
viewers were too invested to really hold it against the show and given the
strong ratings through the second season when the queer stuff really began to
appear it's clear that most audiences weren't uncomfortable with it either
[Music] regardless of whether the final decision came from bob chapic or not his
job is to make the company money and shepherd the disney brand it's hard to
cancel something that's getting good ratings but if you wanted it gone he could
simply cite the disney brand as an excuse the problem has just demonstrated the
disney brand is so threadbare these days that it exists more in concept than in
practice and if the brand is so tyrannical that it's costing the company a
franchise that earned one of the highest accolades for writing excellence while
at the same time developing an ever-growing dedicated fan base maybe the brand
isn't good for business the only tangible excuse at the end of the day is
bigotry and if chapic is letting bigotry lead his decision making for the
company even if he is using the brand as a scapegoat he's just bad at business
especially after the florida controversy over the don't say gay bill disney lost
whatever queer credibility it had left queer audiences were some of the most
dedicated disney fans in the world but with the company's reluctance to
recognize queer characters in their media bleeding over into real life we saw
the consequences of queer erasure spilling out into actual legislation if there
was any time for disney to put up or shut up it was then during that one week
period when these laws were the make or break point of being passed in the
southern states where disney conducts enough of its business to sway the
politicians they endorse even leaks at disney said the word was to remain radio
silent nothing was being planned or prepared according to rumor by mandate from
chapic himself and when a statement was released it was just the normal power
for the course statement you'd expect and meanwhile while this was going on
disney apparently was developing a movie to be released later this year strange
world which itself has an ensemble cast though the central character is a gay
teenager while on the surface we might say oh finally after everything i am
considerably more cynical about disney and their alleged gay representation and
this prompted me to consider how disney could manifest a good relationship with
queer representation okay so disney's put money behind the film to push it
through production given the timing and how long animated films take to make
this was likely a film approved by bob iger it seems funny to me that not a
single soul outside of disney caught wind that this project was happening until
six months from release when it comes to nearly any other disney feature the
press starts talking about them years in advance disney has even announced a
movie so far ahead that they even end up being canceled in development remember
gigantic it was announced in 2015 for 2019 released but was cancelled in 2017.
so disney making strange world alone isn't going to do anything to sway my
opinion disney will need to release the movie in a way that matches how they
would build up hype for frozen or a live-action remake i have to see that the
studio wants people to see this movie that the executives are willing to stand
behind it and prop it up with other movies that they're so proud of unlike the
owl house which disney not only did nothing to promote but has not produced nor
licensed a single piece of tie-in merchandise where's my plush king damn it what
about hooty i'll host lego sets probably better to support etsy creators anyway
but if disney releases strange world quietly without any marketing budget hoping
that it will be entirely forgotten that will send a clear message that the
company has no ongoing interest in promoting queer stories that they are ashamed
of queer stories and that they see no value in queer stories the queerness is
something disney doesn't even want to associate with but is only willing to
interact with insofar as it gets the angry monkey off their back but what will
happen regardless is the gay media hailing disney for giving it to us even if
disney corporate acts like it would rather strange world never existed and while
disney cut the check and threw it out there they're doing nothing to ensure
people either know about it or watch it disney's not actually giving us anything
they're dropping it and then will blame us for not making it successful and then
using that lack of success to justify queer identities as box office poison it
was always dana terrace that gave us the owl house i'm not willing to give
disney the credit when it was made abundantly clear that the mouse didn't want
anything to do with it [Music] if you don't mind me being really cynical for a
minute what does it really mean for a show like the owl house to get cancelled
this is a more significant blow than you would think because while other media
may include queer characters there can be problems with this the more benign
manifestation of visible queerness is characters whose queerness is incidental
and not indicative of the plot this is evident in media i have covered like the
old guard which is valid but visibility is all it accomplishes alternatively you
have stories where the plot is built around queerness like heartstopper and
young royals media has been built around heterosexuality since forever more
annoyingly you have queer characters who exist for a little more than providing
a presentation about the validity of queerness itself which is annoying because
it's not straight people who need queer characters but the owl house is this
anomaly because while it included incidental queerness it also had something to
say about the state of queerness itself the series used textual language to not
only afford a queer audience with visibility but use subtextual language to
encode themes and statements about the queer community i got to read messages in
a piece of media that reflect my very experiences of being queer i mentioned
above that the owl house does like to take a stance on social conformity and
normative conditioning that being the way a society enforces specific values
these collective values and the people who embody and enforce them are what we
refer to as the hegemony for those who are curious the hegemony exists due to
social tradition that enforces certain elements of culture and they are imparted
on us from the day we are conceived the language you speak the fashion of the
day social trends technology biases and prejudices these are all things that
contribute but even things like being wrapped in a blue or pink blanket when
you're born being given toy trucks or dolls on your first birthday are all
things people do to push you into becoming what society expects you to be for
many people those roles are inert and benign most people really don't mind going
along with these social expectations and that's perfectly fine for them the
problem becomes and this is where the queerness and the owl house are concerned
when social conformers punish those who do not or cannot conform to these
hegemonistic values this is where the just be yourself messaging in the 90s came
from in children's programming following the hyper-conformity of reagan's 1980s
there was a reactive push to encourage children to manifest the person they were
rather than the person society badgered them into being content like this rarely
goes as far as the owl house does to outline exactly what it means to be a
social outsider beyond getting bullied by the popular kids or disappointing your
parents and the owl house kind of gets it right getting bullied kind of is the
surface level manifestation of being a social outsider but and queer people can
especially relate to this is far from the only way that society has to badger
you into neat little boxes there's a much larger systemic problem when it comes
to strictly enforced social standards from a top-down authoritarian standpoint
society is easier to control when a ruling party can limit life tracks that are
available to individuals because they in turn can control the tracks in the
boiling isles there are nine paths covens with slight variations to accommodate
subgroups i can't really say our society has many more if anything our society
has markedly less but then you realize that the boiling isles themselves are an
escape from luz's life where she's being forced into one of these projected
paths in the human realm it's not a stretch to say that the principal allegory
of the show is louis abandoning contemporary society in lieu of a queer society
akin to a country kid moving to the big city for college and then learning that
this magical queer world isn't quite how why a literature makes it out to be
there isn't the social scape of a bunch of disparate scrappy folks working
together to facilitate community values there's fragmentation tribalism
internalized queer phobia and thrice as many gatekeepers as there are
distinguishable identities lose faces the same challenges the second she gets to
magic school she's forced into a spell track that will determine what school of
magic she will study for the rest of her life her friend willow already
demonstrated how difficult it can be to change this track and by the end of
season 1 we discover that the fate which awaits those who do not conform is
imprisonment in the conformatorium and that's only for witches who passively
avoid the system for witches like eda who directly challenge the establishment
they await public shame and execution lose struggles with conformity she wants
the simple things by witch standards however she is immediately faced with
criticism simply because humans lack the anatomy to perform typical magic and
even though luz discovers how to study magic through discovering four combinable
glyphs around the isles she is constantly decried as a fake witch it's a
struggle for her to convince classmates and grown-ups to take her seriously many
don't believe she has a place in the boiling isles the place she escaped to in
order to reject conformity and suddenly luz is in an escapist environment which
has the very trappings of the conformist society from which she fled welcome to
the queer community [Music] where we don't have covens we have flags and it's
remarkable that a community that recognizes gender fluid as an identity is so
inflexible about their thinking about a range of identities these are just
labels that describe who you are at a given time they're not your destiny having
the same label all your life is okay but there's also no rules against taking
them off and putting them on at will people change but because we are entering
hegemonistic spaces we need to fit into the boxes that the hegemony likes to use
to classify everything that is outside the norm it's like the only way we can
get accepted is if they get to ascribe neat clinical titles to us like
biologists discovering a new species our acceptance seems to be conditional on
classification and as with the owl house if we can be classified then an
authority can control us and unfortunately a prime example of this latent
process of conditioning as it affects us is present within the owl house because
while there are lesbian and bisexual women depicted and even fluent use if they
them pronouns for an incidentally non-binary character the limited depiction of
gay men uses probably my least favorite trope the gay dads generally bothered by
the gay dads trope a secondary character not the main character but a character
whose parents are significant enough that they could be featured in an episode
or two will have two dads for parents in this case loses best friend willow
which in itself is not a bad thing some people have gay dads some people are gay
dads gay dads have spent a lot of the last century fighting for the ability to
raise children but the problem becomes when that's all we have as if that's the
only way executives are comfortable depicting gay men at all i feel like terrace
herself has earned the benefit of the doubt from me and that if there were any
gay boys for lose to be around they were cut from the show from on high but it's
still disheartening to see that willows fathers and the boys dancing at grom are
likely all we're going to get the series does not have much longer to wrap up a
lot of loose ends and is unlikely to introduce new characters in relationship
dynamics that are not already in play especially gus and hunter while displaying
strong chemistry together might be aged too far apart to develop as anything
other than good friends or brotherly but why is this such a bad thing well
media's role in enforcing conformity is to normalize various expressions it's
why representation in media is so important the more people are confronted with
identities and ideas the more these seem normal normalization through repetition
this is part and partial of why there is such an outcry for women's
representation for different kinds of women and especially different kinds of
bodies more diverse representation opens up more venues of perceivably valid
self-expression it helps if this is done in tandem with real-world
representation in order to establish these identities as people rather than just
characters however it's not a stretch to go from normalization to enforcing
conformative values through repetition the more a kind of identity is depicted
in the same way the more little baby queers and others begin to internalize
various expectations for what their life should look like when children's
programming is only interested in depicting gay men as married fathers of a
secondary character this establishes the expectations that the role of gay men
in society is to perpetuate these traditional homemaking values and gay men
kinda get that kind of conditioning if this is you then that's your truth to
live but there is a sense of badgering and shaming other gays who openly choose
to leave grindr on their phone after they graduate from college it's the same
way the closeted gays with corporate jobs in the 80s would dismiss aids victims
as getting what was coming to them there is very much a drive to pressure other
gay men to put on airs for the straights you know to justify the validity of our
human rights and like the boiling isles the queer community manifests covens of
our own here it's okay to be different but not too different there it's okay to
be magic but not too magic but bear in mind the gatekeeping agenda of the
boiling isles was not enforced by natural magic users emperor bellows was a
human disguising himself as a witch his control and compartmentalization of
magic was always conducted with the objective of eradicating witches is that
also a parallel for the world's queer gatekeeping we like the witches of the
boiling isles fear public scrutiny and violence against us there the imaginary
threat of wild magic is used to justify oppression and violence even though wild
magic never seems to cause any harm to anyone is that really any different from
recent debates about kink at pride parades many within the community blame
regressive anti-queer legislation and book bannings on sex-positive sentiments
that we display so we attack ourselves because some of us don't want to give
straight people a reason to harm us regardless of the fact that many of these
talking points i.e i did not consent to your kink were used verbatim against
trans people in public in the 80s and earlier and that historically speaking the
hateful straits do not often need a reason to use violence against us just like
bellows as a human pretending to be a witch in order to hunt them the sentiments
of self-oppression and gatekeeping in the queer community are either derived
from internalized phobias or reactions to violence threats and regressive laws
if we live in fear of the heterohegemony then the hegemony can still control us
and instead we develop these queer life tracks to rock the boat as little as
possible in the misguided belief that it will give us more political clout to
expand our rights because that's going swimmingly apparently what comes to mind
is that observing the last century queer rites hit their greatest strides when
community attitudes were more radical periods where we put on suits get offices
and follow the appropriate channels are when we make compromises and various
letters to the acronym get left behind when critics call us groomers for even
existing shriveling up and molding ourselves to be what they want isn't going to
advance our causes just like democrats cowering at republicans threatening to
stage a filibuster is just shows us that democrats can be coerced and it's hard
to be taken seriously when history shows that you back down from a fight at the
slightest sign of resistance [Music] thinking about it disney could have used
the owl house to gain so much good will from the queer community just as jay
goes off the rails and becomes a flaming bigot here comes this new franchise
filled with witches and wizards and queer acceptance and representation around
every corner it could have been a replacement for all the people who felt let
down by what she'd done and said disney could have positioned it as the harry
potter for all those abandoned by she who must not be named but they didn't
instead they killed it they couldn't let it die because it was thriving with a
growing fan base instead they killed it they took this beautiful queer story
this house where us weirdos are accepted and embraced and they tore it down and
we didn't say a thing about it the fans did sure but the queer community as a
whole was just sort of silent we've been doing that a lot lately not just us
queers but a lot of people when we need to be loudest we go quiet we weren't
always this way you know i mean the queer community we used to rise up and
demand our rights and protections look at the aids crisis in the 80s and 90s
sure there were a painful amount of gays and nice cushy jobs telling everyone to
just keep quiet and wait for the cdc and fda to do their job to do their
research to spend a few years maybe a decade running tests and trials to find
something that might help you not die of hiv and aids just shut up and wait but
too many of us didn't have the luxury of waiting we were in crisis we needed to
help now and so act up was formed act up protested outside the new york stock
exchange the fda offices the cdc offices inside of churches outside of congress
and even outside the homes of anti-gay politicians its members were arrested
over and over again they were demonized by straight society lambasted by
establishment gays the people with power looked at them like buzzing flies that
needed to be zapped but in the end they did get more funding for aids research
they did get new drugs into a speedier pipeline than the decade-long wait that
fda trials could take it was their activism their fighting that helped turn hiv
and aids from a death sentence to a condition you can not only live with but
live a perfectly normal life with that reminds me of the owl house to be honest
there's a lot of passive resistance to emperor bellows in the owl house people
inside and outside his sphere of power doing a little bit here and there to
shake up his rule but nothing too major he's even convinced multiple witches to
join his side promising them influence and power once his plans come to fruition
just like so many queers bend the knee to establishment power in real life for a
chance to get some power of their own but just like in real life bellows doesn't
plan on ever giving them power once he's finished they'll be dead and he'll be
all the more powerful for it they're nothing but pawns in his great chess match
when people followed the right track they set out before them they were stabbed
in the back just like the queer community gets stabbed in the back look at
same-sex marriage we did everything the right way we took it through the courts
and we won but less than a decade later and it looks like that same court with a
few different members might just reverse that decision even though we did as we
were told and followed the rules at the end of season two eda and lilith send
king and lose away on what they think will be a long wild goose chase of a quest
so long that they will be spared from what will happen when emperor belos's
plans reach their zenith and what will eda and lilith do in the meantime give up
what more can they do and i'm worried that a lot of people of my generation and
those older than me are in the same mindset right now an activist conservative
supreme court is systemically removing rights from people all over the country
but other than some angry tweets and a couple of peaceful protests i'm not
seeing a whole lot of pushback are we exhausted have we been fighting the good
fight for too long have we given up are we surrendering the battle while
shielding the next generation from it so they can fight it later maybe it's a
rude awakening but the next generation isn't being shielded or protected and
they know they're a part of the battle every person with a uterus seeing the
supreme court deleting their bodily autonomy every trans kid being kicked off
their sports team or out of the bathroom every gay kid being outed by homophobic
teachers and queer kids in general watching as their states again and again take
away their rights they know the battle is happening and just like luz and amity
and gus and willow and hunter they're not backing down from the fight they're
fighting back against the destruction of their special magical world passive
resistance doesn't work it's never worked it's always been a band-aid we slap
onto a gaping wound to say we did our part we say it's necessary so that the
systems will accept us into the club that we can't kick up too much of a stink
or else they'll get mad at us and not give us what we need why do we expect to
be given anything we should be taking what we need not just queer people but
women and people of color and disabled people and everyone being crushed by the
weight of the overpowered minority of rich white cisgender men that dictates
what rights we're allowed to have we bend to their whims and do as they say but
becoming what they want us to be doesn't advance our cause it just advances
theirs so i think like king at the end of season two of the owl house maybe we
need to introduce a little bit of chaos into the system show them that their
control over us is an illusion they've tricked themselves into believing we've
been beaten down pretty hard before by politicians and plagues but we still
fought back we still rose up and we still won and so how pathetic are the cishet
power players of the world that they couldn't beat us at our worst so go forth
witches toppled the emperor bellows of the world and conformity i know we can do
it we're kind of magical like that [Music] [Applause] [Applause] so [Music] so
[Music] [Applause] [Music] [Music] [Music] [Music] you