---
date: 2022-11-10
title: The Traumatic Camp of "Mommie Dearest"
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
topics: !!seq
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
  - "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A72beWKKnCc" # Reuploads channel
# description: "a video essay on...?"

contributors:
  downloaded: "[TerraJRiley](https://github.com/TerraJRiley/James_Somerton_Transcripts)"
  citation: 
    - "[Be Kind Rewind](https://twitter.com/bkrewind/status/1731341792254075259)"



cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
Susan Sontag in her essay notes on Camp often cited as the quintessential
document on Camp culture remarks in association between gays and camp and as she
was writing in the 1960s she was highlighting a very retroactive depiction from
her upbringing Baby Jane had only just come out when this paper was published
this indicates that gay attraction to overwrought and badly depicted feminine
archetypes was well solidified long before 1981 when the infamous Mommy Dearest
premiered the purported true story of growing up with movie star Joan Crawford
as a mother through the process of imitation Baby Jane Cleopatra Martha Eve
Harrington and Crawford herself are imitated here to the point wherein Faye
dunaway's mind playing Joan Crawford this is a perfectly nuanced depiction of
holly Woods archetypal movie star John Waters described Mommy Dearest as the
first drag queen role played by a woman and he's not wrong but it seems to be
completely by accident films that are accidental Camp are kind of rare without
clear intent failed Camp either goes so big that it looks cheap and we
disconnect or they don't go big enough either way we don't make a point of
remembering those movies so when one does manage to hit the right buttons we
hold on to it for dear life so enter Mommy Dearest first published as a book by
Christina Crawford in 1978 describing her torturous relationship with her mother
Joan one year after Joan's death in 1977. the story is about a daughter who is
struggling to reconcile her love for an abusive parent which would have made a
great movie in no time at all Studios snatched up the rights to the story and
Christina herself wrote a script when Faye Dunaway was cast in the lead role
riding on her Oscar from 1977's Network the studio and Fey herself wanted to
restructure the script to center around Crawford with Faye's husband who she
managed to make a producer on the film trying to sanitize Joan and Christina's
husband being accused of trying to turn Joan into a monster so what Joan did we
get the film opens with dunaway's Crawford Hollywood queen musing about how
despite her success in global Allure she feels like there's just something
missing from her life yes her career is in a bit of a slump but she isn't as
concerned about that because she thinks that just means that now is a great time
to become a mother unable to Bear children she begins to suggest the option of
adoption to her then boyfriend and Hollywood lawyer Greg sabat who helps her
pull the strings she needs to pull to have an adoption agency hand her a baby
this scene is played entirely straight by the way this visual pulls Crawford to
the center of attention like a rifenstall-esque monarch or Idol once again
unnecessary Pathos and all this unnecessary pathos feeds into this lofty visual
language of Jones Perfection channeled through Dunaway we're only five minutes
in and no it does not slow down from here the First Act of the film explores the
strange power dynamic between Joan and her young daughter Christina this is
where most of the iconic scenes of the movie come from because this is where
Joan is depicted at her most unhinged now how can one of the most powerful
actresses in Hollywood's history have a struggle for power with a child well
that's something that critics slam the script for there isn't really any textual
reason for why Joan is such a terror to her family there's no reason why Joan is
triggered at the sight of a wire hanger or why Christopher has to wear a harness
to bed which feeds into the insanity of this role there are all of these
compulsions but no exploration as to why the surface level of the analysis is
out to seemingly use Joan to subvert the expectations of a Hollywood star
Someone For Whom the public laud is the ideal of perfection in Womanhood though
in reality is a monster in her private life when cameras are on she's Joan
Crawford when they're off she's a woman who is desperately trying to keep
everyone in line so that she can be Joan Crawford already the gays are on board
for that we love expose on fakeness feels like gossip with substance guilt-free
relating to our personal lives a lot of queer people people in the community
come from families that an outsider would say are ideal but for those of us who
have to live with our parents homophobic attitudes that Perfection is a little
different behind closed doors parents often let nasty things slip when they're
away from polite company and that's doubly complicated because it means nobody
believes you especially nowadays when bigotry isn't quite so in Vogue parents
still do and say homophobic and transphobic [ __ ] but they do get a little gas
lady about it dare I say Shady I've even heard of situations especially from
trans people where their own therapists will try convincing them that they're
making up their parents transphobia however just because there's no surface
reading doesn't mean that explanations aren't inferred which is mostly on fade
unaway for sucking up every drop of attention away from any deeper analysis look
a little deeper into Jones parenting in Christina's early life and especially
Jones biographical context and you guessed it there's a commentary about youth
and Beauty in multiple instances in Mommy Dearest whenever it seems that
Christina is coming of age as a lady Jones sees that as competition from living
out a fantasy and the spotlight to taking a few tricks from Jones own book on
how to flirt with men Christina is a threat to Jones Reign Christina is both a
rival a symbol of her fading youth a child a miniature version of Joan within
whom she can place all her expectations and an opportunity to exercise her
Authority Christina must be better than Joan but also Joan must use Christina to
prove that she's still at the top of her game she both pushes Christina beyond
what is reasonable to expect of a little girl and also smugly Revels in
Christina's failures often resorting to humiliating Christina as a punishment
for either not being perfect or for seemingly encroaching on Jones reign don't
tell me yeah I know you look awful you'll be quiet you're always rummaging
through my drawers trying to find a way to make people look at you while you're
always looking at yourself in the mirror why are you doing that tell me Joan is
so fixated on Perfection that she can't handle it when things don't quite fall
into place following several poor performing films MGM releases Joan from her
contract this compiles with a string of failed romances and triggers a Cascade
of Jones Greatest fears her beauty something she felt was her primary asset is
fading but what terrifies her is that she does not have the talent to make up
for it in her defense yes MGM was shafting her as a human being she was aging
but they continued to cast her in roles as if she was the Joan Crawford that she
was 15 years prior instead of I don't know letting her play more mature roles
they just cut her loose because she wasn't ageless Joan Crawford it is implied
held herself up to Perfection because she accurately assumed that a single slip
up would have her thrown to the dogs and when that fear was validated we can
expect some erratic Behavior which gives us one of the most iconic scenes in
Camp history so Hollywood is an absurd place it's why movies about Hollywood
generally don't click with General audiences because it's a place like no other
so you're already in absurd territory but instead of mitigating the absurdity
and explaining the kind of anxieties and pressure that exist in this place
there's Joan down on the ground hacking away at roses in a gorgeous beaded gown
and that line delivery Tina bring me the air where each word is punctuated with
an entirely distinct and separate emotion it's a complete sensory overload and
honestly though the quote gets thrown around fans of the scene are missing two
of the best parts first the fact that they actually committed to a wide shot of
fey hacking away at that orange tree in that gown ah second Jones says bring me
the ax the ax the ax not bring me an ax bring me the ax in the literal syntactic
text of the movie we can gauge that this is a regular Occurrence at the Crawford
household because Christina didn't Flinch and she knew exactly which acts to get
and where to get it I feel as if the movie had done even the slightest amount of
work to bring out the aforementioned subtext you could pull off this exact scene
as a harrowing self-destruction of Jones psyche reading into it Joan feels her
perfect garden must match her internalized feeling of inadequacy if MGM tells
her that she's not perfect then there's no point in having anything perfect
around why should something be more perfect than her if being perfect was her
only value it could be a really gripping scene the problem is that without
adequate build up or actual exploration of Jones emotions instead with Dunaway
opting to depict these emotions as mood swings this scene comes out of nowhere
it's also worth mentioning that this film doesn't really follow a narrative we
go from Jones celebrating her long-awaited Oscar win and the winner is directly
into no water hi guys ever which again could be a legitimately terrifying scene
if there was any kind of narrative consequentialism that said when it comes to
abusive households there's usually this soft reset button at the end of the
episode where there's an unspoken agreement to leave it in the past at least
when it involves younger children which in and of itself is a really eerie and
unsettling concept though Mommy Dearest does absolutely nothing to establish
this precedence with spoken or visual language and no the abuse does not end
with Jones shipping Christina off to boarding school which it is implied Joan
was doing because she observed her daughter beginning to experiment with
flirting not on her watch when Christina is caught kissing a boy at the school
she's reprimanded by the administration but Joan insists that she be expelled
for some reason and instead pulls Christina out of the school now as it turned
out Beyond just kissing boys Christina ended up quite enjoying her time away
from her mother at the boarding school and given that the discipline obsessed
Joan originally intended private school to be a punishment enjoying a punishment
is also so something that will not happen on her watch leading to another iconic
scene Barbara please Barbara bringing Christina home as she has an interview
schedule Joan coiley if not proudly remarks that Christina was expelled after
telling Christina not to talk about the expulsion I can't think of a single
parent who would gloat about their child's expulsion but to Joan it's almost
like a victory a failure for a rival is a victory for her Christina points out
to the reporter that she was not in fact expelled twitched Joan throws a fit
over being accused of lying even though she was lying why do you deliberately
defy me why did you tell her I got expelled because you did get expelled when
Christina calls her out Joan just goes right on and slaps her in front of the
reporter and then blames her for making her embarrass herself in front of the
reporter you you'll be in front of a reporter Joan begins to spiral aimlessly
with such and such parental insults about gratitude but it seems like Christina
is done with this song and dance and asks why Joan bothered to adopt her if Joan
didn't seem to want anything to do with Christina why did you adopt me for a
little extra publicity tensions rise and why can't why can't you get on the
street because I am not one of your fans and now we're getting into the
territory of Christina's accounts that can be backed up by fact fact number one
is that yes Joan really did replace Christina on a soap opera that Christina was
cast in Joan in her 60s takes the role of a 28 year old woman while Christina is
recovering from a benign ovarian tumor fact number two is another iconic scene
Joan Crawford was on the board of directors for PepsiCo via her husband the
company was a nothing up start to compete with the Behemoth that was Coca-Cola
Joan was brought on as a brand ambassador and basically made the company into
what it was Joan married the CEO and the board of directors did try to force her
out after his death in the film this encounter is depicted with Jones screaming
into the boardroom famously saying don't with me fellas and though this is a
famous line from the film it's not the line that was lifted from the secretary's
notes of the meeting but Joan did say to the directors I fought worse monsters
than you for years in Hollywood I know how to win the hard way ironically this
is one of dunaway's more understated lines in the entire film this meeting in
reality was much more cordial than Dunaway delivered why did it need to get
turned up to an 11. why not that's why rounding off the film is the reading of
Joan Crawford's will with Christina and Christopher when it comes to what Joan
left them Joan writes that they will receive nothing or reasons which are well
known to them which was the literal reading of the will that happened that's the
last thing Christopher and Christina ever heard from their mother and when asked
apparently neither of them know what those reasons were there are some
suggestions that Joan wrote them out of the will because she heard Christina was
already writing Mommy Dearest while Joan was alive but that doesn't explain why
she Nicks Christopher the film doesn't even mention Jones younger two children
who she adopted just about the same time that Christina went off to boarding
school funny timing that now as with all great camp movies half of the fun is
the gossip and the making of Mommy Dearest is no exception as mentioned Mommy
Dearest was a celebrity expose Christina's account is a pained tormented
struggle between loving her mother and recalling good memories of Joan but also
living through some very traumatic abuse and behavior though the way Hollywood
figures talk about it especially those who are close to Joan even Betty Davis
herself Christina makes Joan out to be a demon that she wasn't who's one of the
worst people you know in Hollywood that I worked with or that she wouldn't want
to work with again if you don't you don't have one million dollars pay done away
but the book is much tame her especially if your frame of reference is the movie
and honestly a lot of the vitriol that gets slung at Christina is well I never
saw Joan beat her children I never saw this happen well I never saw Harvey
Weinstein rape anybody which you'd think in this post me too believe victim
society that excuse wouldn't fly but Christina to this day has haters I think
Christine was very very envious of Joan Crawford and her public and her
popularity and her beauty Hollywood is said to be a small town and the vitriol
directed at Christina May simply be them protecting one of their own Christina
does make a point of specifically blaming Hollywood for crafting Jones
narcissism before the fall of the studio system the studios themselves would
mold Their Stars into fitting specific personality ideals to put on errors not
only for cameras but for fans in private it was rare that you'd get a star like
Davis or Catherine Hepburn who didn't bother with the facade this is apparent in
a documentary called Bright Lights starring Carrie Fisher and Debbie Reynolds
may they rest in peace Reynolds while being interviewed still had her signature
Debbie Reynolds charm however the documentary crew kept the cameras rolling when
Carrie took her aside from around the corner Debbie's voice is much weaker and
more vulnerable even though she was a woman in her 80s Debbie Reynolds was a
mask she had to wear for the public luckily she did have a supportive family
with whom she didn't have to wear it Christina's take seems to be that Jones
simply wasn't able to take that mask off at all and resorted to drastic Behavior
when the porcelain started to crack but with all the hatred toward the story and
toward Christina it does Boggle my mind that Hollywood was so horny to get this
movie made as soon as the book came out you couldn't find anyone who had
anything good to say about it Faye Dunaway herself agreed to play the role as
long as it was more respectful to Jones memory than the book though Christina's
book was obviously an exploitation book the first one of its kind my task was to
portray a woman a full woman who she was in all her facets not just one I tried
to illuminate who this woman was but it was more than just about being angry it
was about trying to examine and explore the forces that undermined her I don't
think Faye and I watched the same movie Christina actually did not feel the
dunaway's performance accurately depicted her mother specifically claiming that
dunaway's depiction of Joan was far more monstrous than she ever experienced is
that anywhere near the way Joan Crawford actually acted only the makeup Faye
Dunaway specifically went out of her way to manipulate the script the director
and producers to humanize Joan all the while lambasting the book as tabloid
drivel only for the author of that drivel to decry the performance for depicting
a monster it also didn't help that Dunaway was already kind of a diva once again
ironically Joan Crawford was quoted saying of all the actresses to me only Faye
Dunaway has the talent and the class and the courage it takes to make a real
star Dunaway later blamed Mommy Dearest for hurting her career and given that
she was a bit of a hot ticket actress before the 80s she was forced into roles
in smaller films for the rest of her life and on one hand you may say it's
because of her performance but plenty of actors have had bad roles maybe nothing
so Monumental is this but Faye was a bit of a hassle you see on top of being a
prima donna in general she allegedly terrorized the set of Mommy Dearest for
starters she refused to drop out of character during production so on top of
delivering that on camera the crew and cast had to live with that for weeks
rutanya Alda who played Jones assistant in the film wrote a behind the scenes
Memoir about the filming experience she wrote people despised Faye because she
was rude to people everyone was on pins and needles when she worked and relaxed
when she didn't to name a few things Faye allegedly manipulated the director to
Rob other actors of their screen time to pull it to herself she also insisted
that people on set needed to turn away from her while she was performing because
she didn't want an audience regarding her method acting and will avoid a
discussion about what method acting really is and how a lot of actors misuse the
term Dunaway had the usual nonsense to say but with an extra twist if your mind
is on a woman who is dead and you're trying to find out who she was and do right
by her you do feel a presence I felt it at home at night sometimes it wasn't
pleasant I felt Joan was not at rest so I think what happened is that Faye was
so engaged with the memory of Joan that she may have spurred a vindictive streak
against Christina and so she kind of took out all that bottled up rage on the
Effigy of Christina which is why you got all this aggression I think well there
was an initial wave of critics who hailed her performance it didn't take long
for the public perception to swing the other way going down is one of the best
bad performances of all time a serious actress like Faye Dunaway did not cut
into that idea she blamed the director for not reeling her back she blamed the
editors and the producers for taking her depiction of a window into a tormented
soul and making it Camp she blamed Christina and her husband she blamed
Christina's book and worst of all she blamed her audience for not taking away
her intended interpretation though she has come around to the unforeseen fandom
of the film but still doesn't quite get what they see in it because make no
mistake there is a fandom around this moving picture little did Dunaway know she
had opened the floodgates to a whole fandom that had only until then existed in
burlesque shows a fandom that upon the movie's release would hang Christina
Crawford in effigy Mommy Dearest legitimized a whole group of audiences and
creators who were going to do what Dunaway did but do it on purpose with or
without the ghost of Joan Crawford