---
date: 2023-07-13
title: The History of Gay Hollywood
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "How Hollywood Was Born Gay"
  - "Hollywood's Golden Age (of Queer Coding)"
  - "America's War on the Gays (and Communists)"
  - "Where The 'Bury Your Gays' Trope Came From"
  - "When Hollywood Came Out of the Closet"
  - "America v. Homosexuality"
  - "The Queer History of Hollywood (Thumbnail)"
  - "Opening Hollywood's Closet (Thumbnail)"
  - "Dying to be Gay (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
  - "<media>"
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03/20230713+pW_RjbZYi1s+The+History+of+Gay+Hollywood.webm"
description: "a video essay on <xyz>."
notes: [^multipart][^hbomb-min]

cite:
  clips: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---

# Transcript of "How Hollywood was Born Gay"
Originally released 2023-02-15
notes: [^hbomb-min]
[-Zcf3uNGbq4](_videos/-Zcf3uNGbq4.md) (Status: Script)

# Transcript of "Hollywood's Golden Age (of Queer Coding)"
Originally released 2023-03-15
notes: [^hbomb-min]
[SdtbQhAKFSI](_videos/SdtbQhAKFSI.md) (Status: Auto)

# Transcript of "America v. Homosexuality"
Originally released 2023-04-15
notes: [^hbomb-min]
[iJ3M_DhPlI0](_videos/iJ3M_DhPlI0.md) (Status: Auto)

# Transcript of "Where The "Bury Your Gays" Trope Came From"
Originally released 2023-05-11
notes: [^hbomb-min]
[UtRyi-e_HTc](_videos/UtRyi-e_HTc.md) (Status: Auto)

# Transcript of "When Hollywood Came Out of the Closet"
Originally released 2023-05-18
notes: [^hbomb-min]
[fzN9x4XgtwY](_videos/fzN9x4XgtwY.md) (Status: Auto)



# Whole Video Transcript

this video is brought to you by my patrons if you'd like to support my channel
and get access to extras like audio commentaries a patron exclusive podcast and
uncut videos you can join by clicking the link in the description over the last
several years there have been demands for more lgbtq representation in Hollywood
movies but something that many people don't know is that the first movie to ever
win best picture at the Academy Awards was also the first major Hollywood film
to show a gay kiss William a Wellman's film Wings released in 1927. in Wings two
World War One aviators compete for the affections of the same woman while coming
to terms with their growing feelings for one another despite being labeled a
friendship for the duration of the film perhaps to circumvent censorship
requirements it is evident that these two men are developing romantic feelings
for one another made clear by the climactic dramatic kiss Wellman's silent film
captures one of the earliest examples of lgbtq cinema by carefully Towing the
censorship line the film examines the expressed passions of two men entangled in
the conflict of World War One and the emotional torment of the Forbidden
connection wing went on to be a box office Smash and even at a time when the
film industry was quickly transitioning to sound became the only truly silent
film to win best picture but Wings is actually not where our Story begins the
history of Hollywood has always had an asterisk beside it hidden in the
footnotes in tiny little print are the queer actors filmmakers Executives and
tradespeople that helped turn Hollywood from a Backwater Orange Grove in
California to the city in which thousands of young dreamers make their way each
year in hopes of becoming a star it's a long story and like most classic
American Tales it actually doesn't begin in America at all foreign [Music]
[Music] [Music] foreign [Music] the love that dared not speak its name in
America was surprisingly fluent when speaking German throughout the silent era
of film while America was using its new toy to glorify the old west recreating
The Fading dreams of its own mythology European Cinema was shaping a more
realistic look at the diversity of sex and gender in much of Europe at the time
homosexuality was often just another aspect of the Panorama of Human
Relationships The Institute for sexual science founded by Dr Magnus hirschfeld
became Ground Zero in the fight against Germany's anti-gay paragraph 175 which
criminalized homosexual actions between men during the era of the sexual
Enlightenment that occurred in pre-war Berlin it also produced the first film to
discuss homosexuality openly and to contain many of the fundamental issues of
the Gay Liberation movement directed by Richard Oswald different from the others
released in 1919 openly pleaded tolerance for what is termed the third sex the
program given out at screenings even read false beliefs and unjustified
prejudices concerning a sector of male and female sexual behavior known as
homosexuality or love of the same sex have been predominant up to the present
and still influence a large part of our population these homosexual men and
women who are attracted to persons of their own sex are often regarded as wicked
criminals and Libertines but scientific research has determined that
homosexuality is an inborn tendency for which the individual cannot be held
responsible there are homosexuals in every class among the educated and among
the uneducated and in the highest and lowest sectors of the population in the
great cities and the small towns among the strict moralists and among the most
easy-going that love for one's own sex can be just as pure and Noble as love for
the opposite sex the only difference being the object of Desire not the nature
of one's love the film along with other films from the same era that dealt with
topics such as abortion incest sex education and venereal disease was
propagandistic in its approach in the early 1930s Nazis were responsible for the
destruction of most prints of the film Christopher isherwood recalls at the time
that Nazis frequently disrupted screenings of the film in Vienna one of them
discharged a handgun into the crowd injuring multiple people in his book
Christopher and His Kind isherwood provides a first-person description of the
movie three scenes remain in my memory one is that a ball at which the dancers
all male are standing fully clothed in what seems about to become a daisy chain
it is here that the character played by Conrad veit meets The blackmailer Who
seduces him and then ruins him the next scene is a vision in which Vite has a
long procession of Kings poets scientists philosophers and other famous victims
of homophobia moving slowly and sadly with hands bowed Dr hirschfeld himself
appears I think the corpse of Conrad veit who has committed suicide at this
point is laying in the background hirschfeld delivers a speech that is to say a
series of titles pleading tolerance for the third sex and so it was that the
very first gay man to ever be portrayed on film met his tragic End by taking his
own life this would determine the future of LGBT characters on film and
television for many years to come the suicide of Vite and the idea of blackmail
predicted the fates of American Screen characters who would suffer for their
sexuality in like manner when American Cinema reached a similar point of
inclusion about 50 years later it would appear that the recognition of the third
sex in Europe was not associated with a particular concept of masculinity as was
the case in the United States the focus of the drama and Intrigue was not on the
sexual aspects of the passions that were awakened in human relationships rather
the emotional qualities of the passions that were aroused in human relationships
in Mikhail produced in 1924 we see a gay love story in which a famous artist
falls in love with his young male model the model however is an opportunist who
saps his benefactor's artistic Spirit eventually spurning his affections for the
more promising charms of a wealthy young princess in the end the artist leaves
all of his possessions to the youth and on his deathbed declares I can die in
peace I have known a great love the film which was adapted from the book of the
same name was released in America for a limited time in 1926 under murky
circumstances what would come to be titled chained the story of the third sex
ran for a short time at New York's Fifth Avenue Playhouse American sensors
objected to its first issued English title the inverts the modifications to the
titles provide an excellent illustration of the American thinking about
homosexuality during that time period the subtitle the story of the third sex
suggests that any narrative that deals with gay love regardless of how seriously
it does so is considered to be a story about homosexuality while stories that
deal with heterosexual love are simply seen as stories this appears to be just
as much of an issue for American filmmakers and producers today as they appear
to be unable to conceive of the existence of queer characters in a movie unless
the subject matter of the movie is itself being Queer as understood and depicted
by mostly straight people this discussion of gay men shouldn't suggest that
lesbians didn't also get attention in the film Pandora's Box which was
originally shown in Germany in 1929 there is a figure who is most likely the
first lesbian on screen to be portrayed overtly the film presented the story of
the great unrequited love and passion between two women the Countess keshvitz
and the lady she is enamored with Lulu although the love that geschvitz feels
for Lulu is referred to as sterile within the context of the movie it is a
driving force in the action and it makes the introduction of a Sapphic passion
on screen an exciting and historical cinematic event an event American audiences
likely would never know of British sensors deleted the character of Countess
geschwitz from the film before Prince were sent off to America though original
German Prince did eventually make it across the pond in the 1960s when it comes
to American-made gay characters one of the earliest direct references to
homosexuality was a parody which is predictable I suppose the one real comedy
short the soilers starring Stan Laurel was a parody of the successful Western
the spoilers a drawn out battle sequence between the film's lead Laurel and a
corrupt Sheriff takes up the majority of the running time but another very gay
cowboy suddenly appears on the screen in the middle of the brawl as the two men
continue to quarrel he makes a show of batting his eyes at both of them and
primping a little bit before sashaying out of the room Laurel wins the fight
against the sheriff but no one appears to care as a result he is left sitting
outside the tavern looking disheartened the gay cowboy pokes his head out of a
second floor window and lavishly blows Laurel a kiss while mouthing the words my
hero when Laurel rejects him he drops a flower pot on his head this is one of
the first examples of the use of the harmless image to present homosexuality in
film but in the context of rough and tough men in the soon-to-be
industry-dominant Western genre we were laying the foundations of the Trope from
the word go there is a very overt connection between the effeminate and apparent
homosexual in this film even though the cowboy was not supposed to be
impersonating a woman the primping and fussing characteristics that he displayed
were unmistakably those of a woman at least as men at the time expected women to
act the comedy here was highlighting how out of place this boy was in the Rough
and Tumble world of the men who won the West the irony of course is that there
is significant historical evidence to suggest that the West Was in fact Rife
with gay men many from Europe and was largely settled by women in sex work
however even though the soilers is a mockery of queerness among other things the
use of satire indicates that homosexuality especially in the context of it
existing in traditionally masculine spaces was on the mind of the public at
large satire can't function well if it's not deriving context from popular ideas
even as the Cowboy isn't flattering though he is slaying his inclusion indicates
that the public was perhaps at the time willing to accept us as harmless though
strange and out of place however this was precisely the kind of event that the
sensors were keeping an eye out for public ordinances already enabled censoring
organizations around the country to look at pictures in advance of public
showings although all of those such entities had little actual Authority the
rules for Morality In the movies clearly mentioned sex perversion as a key don't
even if queerness was the subject of ridicule the United States Supreme Court
ruled in 1915 the exhibition of Motion Pictures is a business pure and simple
and is conducted for profit like other spectacles not to be regarded or intended
to be regarded as a part of the presence of the nation or the organs of public
opinion this decision meant that movies were not protected by the First
Amendment guarantee of free speech due to this ruling harsh censorship
legislation was eventually enacted in the states of New York Florida
Massachusetts Maryland and Virginia within just a few years following the
Judgment the gold standard in the United States was in the New York statute
passed in 1921 it stated that a film should be licensed by the state unless such
a film or part thereof is of such character that its exhibition would tend to
corrupt morals or incite crime the indecency immorality and obscenity were
nowhere described or defined in the statute and thus there was considerable
latitude for interpretation essentially giving free reign to wealthy white
right-wing Christian men to dictate what could and could not be in any given
film released in these states one of the first instances of lesbians kissing on
screen was in a brief orgy scene in Cecil B demille's manslaughter in 1922 the
vision of two passionate women locked in a forbidden Embrace was used by demil
to condemn the excesses of sex that he was portraying so graphically and
excessively in return for his judgment on the crime he was consistently allowed
to paint a more explicit picture of evil especially sexual sins than was
ordinarily permitted by Hollywood sense users showing things like sex
homosexuality interracial relationships and other such things was fine as long
as the participants were punished this was particularly true when the
retribution transpired in a Biblical City quoting scripture on their title cards
DeMille films became moral lessons rather than exploitation or so was said they
also became box office extravaganzas which leads me to wonder just how far back
the connection between these distinctly American sets of Pop Christianity
neopuritanical values and American entertainment really goes by 1922 there were
censorship bills before the legislature of 32 states and throughout the nation
the distinct rank of moral indignation was wafting its way toward an industry
that at times seemed to embody Wicked behavior of all kinds the sensors were
horrified by Salome a 1923 film with a reportedly all Queer cast made in tribute
to Oscar Wilde forcing several sequences to be cut altogether including one
showing the gay relationship between two Syrian Soldiers the handwritten report
of the exam limiting sensor in New York concluded this picture is in no way
religious in theme or interpretation in my judgment it is a story of depravity
in immorality made worse because of its biblical background absolutely
sacrilegious American sensors became even more potent in the late 1920s and
early 30s the inclusion of audio into what were briefly dubbed as talkies
brought a new element of realism to the screen and public morality Watchdogs
began to Bear Down on the industry but while censorship laws were becoming more
specific their outlook on gay representation was kept vaguely broad you didn't
need two men or women kissing to get banned cross-dressing weakness or softness
in male characters and even overly intellectual male characters were enough to
draw the ire of sensors will Hayes was appointed president of the motion picture
producers and Distributors of America or mppda in the late 1920s Hayes served as
both an elder and the Presbyterian church and as a former Postmaster General of
the United States that was the extent of his qualifications the organization was
established primarily with the goals of fostering positive public relations for
the studios and shielding the business from the potential of more restrictions
from the outside world which they mostly achieved in 1930 when the motion
picture production code which served as the basis for the industry's
self-regulation and censorship was actually written when the code was
strengthened in 1934 under intense pressure from the Catholic Church even gently
eluded gay characters began to disappear the image of the film business as being
harsh and manly with no tolerance for foolishness was in continual conflict with
the industry's reputation for being effeminate the sensors used the archetype to
Target on-screen characters using it as a thinly veiled scapegoat to put
pressure on a relatively Progressive media industry which had been a safe haven
for queer creators of all types up to that but filmmakers knew how to skirt the
sensors in many cases the fact that most early movies sissies were only gay if
one chose to see them as being gay was simply a reflection of the fact that the
existence of queer people in society was acknowledged only when and Society
chose to do so instead of being overtly queer characters like say the Femme
Cowboy from the soilers were viewed as symbols for failed masculinity rather
than actual homosexuals and so they were allowed to stick around most sissies
during the reign of the code were not necessarily demeaned nor were they used in
Cruel or offensive ways it was not the but what he stood for that was offensive
some actors created memorable galleries of gossipy snoops and snippy shopkeepers
who were often a little bit on the innocent side but not always gays were also
associated with dangerous revolutionaries hiding beneath the surface of normal
society the ghetto was one other world in which gay characters might frequently
be seen on screen before and after the reign of the motion picture code this
represented the reality of the majority of gay experiences at the time which had
been restricted to manifestations and slums of one kind or another the
underground Life as a shelter for gays is a common theme in many instances the
gay ghetto has been linked to the criminal underground this is due to the fact
that whenever there is an increase in illegal activity of any kind even
homosexuality organized crime moves in to take control of the situation and make
a profit though it should be noted that organized crime functions vary
differently than Hollywood often depicts and in some cases especially from the
1940s onward can be beneficial to a growing community in preventing
gentrification and climbing rental rates though as far as Hollywood played into
misconception of criminal Behavior homosexuals were widely considered to be a
criminal Group which differentiated them from other types of minority groups
crime rates might be high in some majority non-white areas but just being a
person of color was not itself technically illegal though representatives of law
enforcement may act otherwise the film blood Money released in 1933 showed a
great deal of ambiguous sexual tension in The Wider underworld in the movie the
existence of homosexuality is openly acknowledged in the subculture that is a
shelter on the fringes of acceptable Society in the film Sandra Shaw is featured
in several sequences as a fun-loving blonde who likes men's clothes at one point
in the film her boyfriend is preparing for a date along with his sister a
nightclub owner who warns him about the kind of women he's running with oh this
one is nothing but Claire where's the miracle and a man of tuxedo though he gets
what she means and protests later in the film Shaw turns up again in a tweed
jacket this time with another woman in tow movies like this were what led to
further intensification of censorship in the mid-1930s in addition to
strengthening the code will Hayes reacted to criticism by inserting morality
Clauses into the contracts of actors and compiled a doom book of 117 names of
those deemed unsafe because of their personal lives homosexuality was denied as
fervently off-screen as it was on a literally unspeakable part of the culture
Hollywood has always been more restrained on screen than in real life in Blood
Money homosexuality is just another pocket of an underworld that exists outside
the law sexual connotations often surrounded the attitudes of powerful men
toward hired boys or servile companions although the villainous character of
Joel Cairo in the Maltese Falcon is identified by Sam Spade secretary in the
novel as homosexual the film version instead just turns him into a perfume
wearing Kane kissing with lace handkerchiefs Elijah cook Jr as Sydney Green
Street's bodyguard Wilmer however is implicitly homosexual he is referred to as
sunny boy and kid and Bogart derisively calls him a gunzel since about 1915
prisoners had used the German word gonzal to mean a bottom especially young
inexperienced criminal bottoms all of this was meant to connect the queer
underworld with the underworld run mostly by the Sicilian Mafia who due to
movies like Scarface and Public Enemy were roundly feared across the country
this fear the queer mindset was brought to its logical conclusion in the horror
films of the 1930s where gays appeared as predatory Twilight creatures with a
sense of style the equation of horror with the sins of the flesh is easily scene
in Monster movies of the period creatures like Frankenstein's monster and Count
Dracula were almost always linked with the baser instincts of human beings the
essence of homosexuality as a predatory weakness permeates the depiction of gay
characters in horror films in Dracula's daughter countress Maria zaleska has a
special attraction to women a preference that was even highlighted in some of
the original ads for the film queer parallels in 1931's Frankenstein and its
1935 sequel the Bride of Frankenstein arose from a vision that both films had of
the monster as an impossible anti-social figure in the same way that gay people
were things that should not have happened in both films the homosexuality of
director James whale may have been the spark of the vision Robert Aldrich
director of the camp progenitor whatever happened to Baby Jane recalls that
Jimmy whale was the first guy who was blackballed because he refused to stay in
the closet Mitchell lisin and all those other guys played it straight and they
were on board but whale said okay I'm a great director and I don't have to put
up with this and he was a great director not just a company director and he was
just unemployed after that never worked again it should be noted that many
articles on James whale do not reference his refusal to be closeted nor the haze
code in general as a reason for the decline of his career in spite of available
first-hand testimonials demonstrating that it wasn't just a contributing factor
that it was the main reason and Aldrich who was a company director if not an
incredibly good one would have been in the know about what producers and Studio
heads were saying behind the scenes according to Aldrich an obviously lesbian
director like Dorothy arsener got away with her lifestyle because she was
officially closeted a gay woman keeping her lifestyle on the sly was fine
because it made her one of the boys but a man who like whale openly admitted to
his loving relationship with another man in this case producer David Lewis did
not stand a chance although James whale did work again briefly in 1943 he fell
Into Obscurity soon after in 1957 he was found dead at the bottom of his
swimming pool Frankenstein's monster was the creation that would eventually
destroy its creator just as whale's own aberration would eventually destroy his
career the monster in Frankenstein Bears the brunt of society's reaction to his
existence and in the sequel the Bride of Frankenstein the monster himself is
painfully aware of his own unnaturalness in Frankenstein it is the monster who
limits Henry Frankenstein's contact with the normal World The Old Baron
Frankenstein's father continually begs his son to leave the madness to come home
and marry the young Elizabeth finally the father Elizabeth and Henry's best
friend go to the lab to force him for his own good to leave his creation behind
to be free of his obsession to be normal later the monster fulfills Mary
Shelley's initial prophecy of joining his Creator on his wedding night and
thereby preventing the consummation of the heterosexual marriage the monster is
then hunted by townspeople in The Bride of Frankenstein it is the odd sisified
Doctor pretorius Who Comes to entice Henry Frankenstein from his Bridal bed in
the middle of the night pretorius 2 has created life and Henry's curiosity again
overcomes his good instincts and proves his downfall pretorius proclaims himself
to be in love with evil and professes to detest goodness no accident then that
the monster is seeing the unnaturalness and Folly of his own existence takes to
evil pretorius with him when he pulls the lever to destroy himself and his bride
crying out to the young heterosexual couple of Henry and Elizabeth you live go
he'll stay we belong dad in later decades the queerness of the Frankenstein
story would reach its logical Camp conclusion with The Rocky Horror Picture Show
a cult classic rock musical the 20th Century Fox never gave a proper wide
release in the United States and it's unlikely that now that they own It Disney
will either since 1976 the film has been playing Midnight shows in cities
throughout the country a truly subversive film on the subjects of sexuality
movies sex roles and the Queer as Monster Rocky Horror features two innocent
presumed straight protagonists Brad and Janet who have car troubles not far from
a dubious manner this foreboding Mansion is the residence of one Dr
frankenferter the apotheosis of deviant sexuality who introduces himself as a
Sweet Transvestite from transsexual Transylvania frankenfurter is an androgynous
alien from outer space when the timid straight couple arrive he is in the
process of showing off his latest creation a hunky blonde named Rocky who is
straight off the slab and wearing nothing but tight gold trunks pointing to
Rocky frankenferter sings Lusty in seven days I can make you a man then proceeds
to introduce Brad and Janet to well his penis possible penis we can't know for
certain he is an alien after all as both a catalog and a spoof of old monster
movies and science fiction films The Rocky Horror Picture Show becomes almost
dizzying in its references but its most expert satire is of the age-old fear
with which mainstream Society encounters deviant sexuality and is Then followed
through to the very end when frankenfurter is destroyed for the good of society
nevertheless he has one last chance in life to perform with the entire cast an
underwater ballet version of the film's main message don't dream it be it a song
that becomes a message of Hope for everyone who feels like they're not quite who
they're supposed to be just yet Tim Curry's performance especially in his
rendition of Sweet Transvestite is the essence of what every parent in America
feared would happen if our sexual standards were relaxed it becomes the living
horror of making deviant sexuality visible and tangible in the only kind of
setting in which it could possibly work an old dark house populated by every
letter of the lgbtq alphabet soup as they sing rock and roll to seduce the
innocent youth of America Hollywood didn't know what to do with The Rocky Horror
Picture Show then and probably wouldn't know what to do with it now but despite
its shabby treatment it has grossed hundreds of millions of dollars over the
years and continues to play throughout the world audiences made up of largely
young people who attend screenings with bags of rice stale toast corsets boas
and fishnets Rocky Horror was shining a spotlight on the dimly lit
representation of queer monsters in the 1930s Golden Era of Hollywood giving
them one last hurray as a posthumous Victory against the haze code which
collapsed entirely just a few years before its release but back in the 1930s
filmmakers still had to be clever about coding the characters specifically to
make it past the sensors General American audiences though could easily see
through the coding however it wasn't long before the easily red coating was
forced to become almost if not completely illegible [Music] in Hollywood's early
years homosexuality found its way on screen in ways both secret and obvious to
the filmmakers behind the camera audiences rarely pushed back against these
depictions but those who did were loud if not Legion women's suffrage groups and
the Catholic Church were the most dedicated to removing gay and lesbian content
from Hollywood movies and with the institution of the motion picture production
code they more or less succeeded filmmakers could now be fined or blacklisted
for including gay and lesbian characters in their movies and some films such as
Dracula's daughter were heavily edited to remove any overt lesbian content but
go figure a bunch of people who came up in the industry through artistic Roots
knew how to manipulate literary devices in visual language to still include gay
themes and characters in their movies though in much less obvious ways along
with World War II and a coming end to what was referred to as the Golden Age of
Hollywood a time of gay invisibility had swept over the industry but it was an
invisibility that you could see through if you knew how to look even though
Hollywood didn't always tell the truth this kept a lot of unwelcome facts and
small problems from getting in the way of the American dream even though gay and
lesbian people were often the ones who made these dreams come true they were
never a part of it it is said that Sam Goldwin founder of Goldwyn pictures which
was one of the three Studios that merged to create MGM once wanted to film The
Well of Loneliness by Radcliffe Hall but when a producer told him they couldn't
because the main character was a lesbian Goldwin simply responded by saying so
what we'll make her American despite goldwyn's confusing lesbian for Lebanese
the Americanization of lesbianism did happen and meant nothing more than the
simple refusal to deal with it honestly it was an imitation of the American fear
of sexuality in general and the American duplicity regarding sexual deviance in
particular in all actuality it was the same invisibility that gays experienced
in real life only replicated in the movies despite this gays continued to make
an appearance as subtextual Phantoms that represented the fear of homosexuality
itself they served as his alien life forms that were yet firmly established as
per part of the culture in every Walk of Life and they formed the shadowy
counterpart to the concept of the American dream sissies and tomboys were used
as yardsticks for what was deemed acceptable behavior in a culture that was so
preoccupied with the upkeep of sex norms and the celebration of everything
masculine one performer who happily ignored these sex Norms was Greta Garbo
whose performance as Queen Christina in the film of the same name released in
1934 was a challenge to the standards of sexual and gender behavior that were
considered acceptable at the time it was the Collision on screen of her own
androgynous aesthetic with the reality of Christina's affinity for masculine
clothes and activities that gave the picture a realism that was uniquely its own
Garbo who would Express her desire to be in a film version of Oscar Wilde's The
Picture of Dorian Gray with herself in the title role and Marilyn Monroe as a
young girl ruined by Dorian created a particular dynamic in Queen Christina one
that penetrated the queer Erasure of the script her for Lauren longings to
escape her gloomy Destiny of marriage and her skillful rejection of a series of
male suitors are broken in the first part of the film by her encounter with the
Countess ebba Spar played by Elizabeth young their brief scene together is
charged with sexuality and real affection in that scene Garbo lifts the
emotional barriers to characterize her encounters with mail suitors Abba
suggests brightly that they go for a sleigh ride but Christina tells her sadly I
can't know oh why not ambassadors treaties councils how boring later when
pressed by a Statesman to marry and produce an heir to the throne Christina
refuses but your majesty you cannot tie an Old Maid I have no intention to
Chancellor I shall die a bachelor her need to escape the role assigned her by
life was Christina's true driving passion Queen Christina makes this abundantly
clear she flees into the snow later in the film when she discovers that
ebbespauer has betrayed her love that is when she meets Antonio the one man who
seems to accept her and love her for all the things that so horrify her court
but he falls in love with her thinking at first that she's a man and he seems
quite willing to explore whatever this strange situation may bring in the early
days of Hollywood queen Christina stood out due to the fact that it included a
character that was unmistakably bisexual as well as many instances of
bisexuality in The Narrative of the film itself at the time the lives of notable
gay men and lesbians were either portrayed in a manner that was drastically
different from their actual experiences or were not addressed at all in
biographical films this straight watching of History has only marginally changed
in modern Cinema as seen by the fact that films such as Troy A Beautiful Mind
and the imitation game more or less ignore or completely erase the fact that its
primary characters are gay or bisexual it's one of the reasons why audience
members were taken aback by the lesbian relationships that were depicted in the
favorite even in the late 2010s audiences of historical biopics anticipated that
queerness would be erased from historical Recreations the Betrayal of noted
persons as heterosexual without regard for their true to life sexuality has
never been seen as a serious offense against a person's identity until recently
not even by the person whose life is falsified no it was better to be straight
even queer audiences themselves believe that especially in Hollywood's golden
age when it was a dirty secret most people yearned to be rid of but there was an
odd dichotomy developing in Hollywood whereas lesbian or bisexual female
characters could be redeemed in a film by being paired off with the right man in
the end bisexual or gay male characters had no such luxury in the film Adam's
Rib which was released in 1949 David Wayne plays the role of Kip who is a
yardstick par Excellence Kip serves as Catherine Hepburn's girlfriend acting as
a high-class Ethel Mertz to her feminist Lucy Ricardo despite Catherine
Hepburn's defense Spencer Tracy's apparent unease around him cannot be denied as
they were leaving the room following a heated discussion over feminism Wayne
said to Hepburn you've got me so convinced I may even go out and become a woman
when Wayne has gone Spencer Tracy mutters and he wouldn't have far to go either
Hepburn's Amanda can only shush him an indication that her feminism like that of
contemporary feminists who wanted their sons to grow up to be real men goes only
so far and breaks down at the thought of actually obscuring sex and gender roles
altogether yet the unyielding conviction in the masculine role along with the
hatred that this ideology bred was about to be shaken to its very Foundation the
buddy system that had been used during the second world war had brought troops
closer together than they had ever been before men who loved each other's
company but always selected women to display their manhood were forced to
confront their innate sexuality in the all-male atmosphere of military forces
this brought to the surface a misunderstanding regarding men's fundamental
sexuality the worry that these heterosexual relationships between men may in any
way be interpreted as being gay was a very genuine one and the movies made sure
that there was no indication of homosexuality involved in depictions of such
Partnerships there might have been less suspicion of homosexuality had the level
of paranoia surrounding its very mention not been so high in 1946 Richard
Brooks's novel The Brick Foxhole dealt with obsessive masculinity in the
military in it a gay decorator is murdered by a soldier he brings home to his
apartment for a drink the 1947 film adaptation Crossfire made the victim a
Jewish person and thus became an example of Hollywood's maturity in dealing with
anti-Semitism the New York Times noted the change in a review but said only that
the motivation for the murder had been changed to good Advantage The novel's
crucial discussion of men's striking out at what they fear in themselves was
omitted whenever all male circumstances were the topic of the movies whether
they were Cowboys sports or Soldiers the fantasy of the unfettered perennially
youthful man in pure and unsullied Brotherhood battled over the ever-present
societal taboo against male closeness director Clarence Brown toyed with this in
his film flesh and the devil in which John Gilbert and Lars Hansen play lifelong
friends who separate when one of them marries the woman they both love played by
Grand Garbo by the end of the film Garbo has slept with both of them
precipitating a reluctant duel between the two men trying to stop them she falls
through some thin ice and drowns at this the men throw down their guns Embrace
and walk off into the sunset together their arms around each other their bond
rejoined following the intrusion of a woman Clarence Brown spoke of the
situation in an interview you can see my problem how to have these two Leading
Men wind up in each other's arms and not make them look like a couple of fairies
Joan melon in her study of masculinity in the movies Big Bad Wolves says that
the less violent men were in their film personas The more likely they were to be
interested in heterosexual love just the opposite has been true for
homoeroticism the perception of homosexual feelings as a brutal furtive
dangerous Force flourished in films about male bonding and violence playing off
of the idea of homosexuality being innately Criminal gentlemen in the movies
Jimmy Stewart and any movie about small town USA would never even subtextually
approach such relationships or feelings the concept of the gentleman who chooses
to love other men did not exist in American Film except in comedy in the films
of Laurel and Hardy their relationship was given a sweet and very real loving
Dimension a classic example of this one with unmistakably gay overtones is
1932's their first mistake Hardy's wife complains that he sees too much of
Laurel and not enough of her and the two friends discussed the situation well
what's the matter with her anyway no I don't know she says that I think more of
you than I do of her foreign but we won't go into that you know what the whole
trouble is what what you need is a baby in your house well what's that got to do
with it well if you've if you had a baby and it would keep your wife's mind
occupied and you could go out nights with me and she'd never think anything
about it so they go out and adopt a baby when they return home with it they
discovered that Hardy's wife is suing him for divorce for alienation of
affections having named Laurel as the other woman the remainder of the film is a
beautifully timed and performed domestic scene with Laurel and Hardy in bed with
the baby between them the obviousness of the coding has been lambasted ever
since the film's release with Charles Barr in his study of Laurel and Hardy
saying that there is something rather absurd about discussing this seriously at
all in the often infantile pre-sexual Nursery World in which Stan and Ollie
lived such Behavior would be natural I'd agree that it is in fact natural but
the idea of there ever having been a pre-sexual time is reaching but notice that
it is the naturalness of Laurel and Hardy's behavior that Barr and other critics
choose to defend not the sexuality and so it is indeed an attack on americanism
itself to suggest that homosexuality is present in the Laurel and Hearty
routines in pointing these things out one attacks the American illusion the
illusion that there is in fact such a thing as a real man and that to become one
is as easy as changing one's name from Marion Morrison to John Wayne the fact is
that comedy has been able to comment on sexual roles more readily than drama
could only because people may dismiss it as an impossible first neglected buddy
relationships exist even in classic cartoons while Disney may not have liked
hearing it but there are gay overtones in the relationships of more than one
pair of beloved animated figures from his classic years in 1940s Pinocchio
Honest John and Gideon a fox and a cat are best friends who procure Lost Boys
for sale to an evil Coachman who takes them to Pleasure Island they seduce
Pinocchio with the hit song High diddly D the second line of which is high
diddly day an actor's life is gay in Cinderella everyone's favorite mice jock
and Gus Gus volunteer to help finish Cinderella's dress in time for the ball but
they are quickly admonished by a female Mouse to leave the sowing to the women
their relationship grows throughout the film and later when Cinderella describes
how she was swept off her feet by the handsome prince Gus Gus puts an arm around
Jock's shoulder and holds him close and of course from the competition there was
Bugs Bunny giddy to throw on a dress and a wig at the first available
opportunity the real emotions in the movies at the time with exceptions for
films like Gone With the Wind always took place between men men had been the
important forces at work both as instigators of all the action and plots and as
instigators of the films themselves by deciding what movies should and should
not be made when screenwriter Gore Vidal discussed the script for the 1959
version of Ben Hur with director William Weiler they concluded that the Rivalry
between Judah Ben-Hur Charlton Heston and his boyfriend Masala Stephen Boyd was
insufficiently motivated by a single political scene in which Ben Hur refuses to
Aid the Roman cause despite his friend's pleas Fidel described the problem I
proposed the notion that the two had been adolescent lovers and now Masala has
returned from Rome wanting to revive the love affair but Ben Hurd is not he has
read Leviticus and knows an Abomination when he sees one I told Wyler this is
what's going on underneath the scene they seem to be talking about politics but
Masala is really trying to rekindle A Love Affair and Weiler was startled we
discussed the matter and then he sighed well anything is better than what we've
got in the way of motivation but don't tell Chuck I did tell Stephen Boyd who
was fascinated he agreed to play the frustrated lover study his face in the
reaction shots in that scene and you will see that he plays it like a man
starving it was 1959 and filmmakers were on the verge of new creative freedoms
Vidal was saying that it made sense that the two men should be attracted to each
other theirs was the most vibrant and interesting relationship in the film
Weiler later told Vidal the biggest mistake we made was the straight love story
if we had cut out the girl all together and concentrated on the two guys
everything would have gone better director Howard Hawks always concentrated on
men in his films and in his films things went better than in Ben Hur at least in
1948's Red River hawks's only use for Joe Andrew was to have her tell John Wayne
in Montgomery Clift what we can already see my bit expected trouble for days
when when anybody would have a mind would know you two love each other yet the
nature of that love despite Cliff's scene Persona doing for his character what
Garbo did for Queen Christina remained hidden despite one of the most re-watched
and arguably most homoerotic scenes in any film at the time being one in which
Montgomery Clift and John Ireland compare their pistols the only open
acknowledgment of the homosexuality and Buddy films came from those critics who
attributed the misogynist attitudes of such films to the covert gayness in them
when Joseph McBride and Gerald Perry in an interview in film comment questioned
Hawks about the gay undertones of his films Red River in particular Hawks told
them it was a goddamn silly statement to make it's easy to see how directors
might be oblivious to the subtexts that are present in their own work since
homosexuality is a viable alternative has been repressed both in the lives of
men and in their work on screen the taboo against male closeness is taken far
more seriously than it is in real life where it is more likely to be seen as a
neutral gay sensibility some people contend that there is no such thing as a gay
sensibility since the presence of such a thing would imply the existence of a
straight sensibility which is something that unquestionably does not exist yet a
gay sensibility can take on various forms and it is possible for it to be
present even when there is no indication of homosexuality either overt or covert
in front of or behind the camera the need to conceal one's sexual orientation
for such a significant portion of one's life is primarily responsible for the
development of a gay Sensibility it is a ghetto sensibility that was developed
out of the necessity to cultivate and employ a second site that would interpret
discreetly what the world sees and what the actual reality may be it was gay
sensibility that for example often enabled some lesbians and gay men to see at
very early ages even before they knew the words for what they were something on
the screen that they knew related to their lives in some way often it was the
simple recognition of difference the sudden understanding that something was
altered or not what it should be perhaps the role reversal of a Dietrich or
agarbo evoking a hidden truth about the nature of sexuality in general or it may
have been the tone in James Dean's voice as he zipped up the jacket of the Dead
salominio In Rebel Without a Cause And muttered he's always cold it was the
sense of Yearning that was there in these encounters the unsaid forbidden
desires that were always there but were always repressed even if the parts did
not fit together until years later it was a voice that could not be ignored with
no real homosexuals allowed on screen in the 40s and 50s sensors often began
looking for these hidden messages sometimes they found them even when there were
real things that were abundantly clear in the film rope for instance directed by
Alfred Hitchcock in 1948 Farley Granger and John Dahl play the role of two
pretentious gay lovers who on a whim murder a former Prep School classmate they
do this because they believe they possess a superior intellect and are not
morally responsible to a crass Society the sensor's attention was drawn not to
the exact relationship between the characters but rather to the discourse
between them Arthur Lawrence recalls that when he finished his screenplay for
rope he left England for America and while he was in America the script was
passed on by American censors rope came from an English play called rope's end
and while I was in New York the producer Sydney Bernstein took a few passages
from the play and put them back in the script so when it came back from the
Hayes office every one of those passages was circled with the common homosexual
dialogue written in the margin and do you know what they were it was simply that
they were saying things like my dear boy to each other and the way that the
English talked was known as fruity over here it's actually a long-held myth
within film circles that the reason Hitchcock filmed rope to appear as one long
unedited take was so that sensors would be unable to force him to cut any
perceived gay content without altering the artistic intent of the film there
were also other more covert homosexual relationships in Hitchcock films such as
the one between Martin Landau and James Mason North by Northwest and more
strikingly the one between Robert Walker and Farley Granger in strangers on a
train nonetheless the filmmaker only seldom offered commentary on matters of
this nature regarding his work but Arthur Lawrence later said we never discussed
hitch and I whether the characters in rope were homosexuals but I thought it was
apparent I guess he did too but it never came up until we got to Casting we'd
wanted Cary Grant for the teacher in Montgomery Clift for one of the boys and
they both turned it down for the same reason their image they felt they couldn't
risk it eventually John Dahl and Farley Granger played the boys and they were
very aware of what they were doing he also stated that Robert Walker was the one
who suggested playing Bruno Anthony as a gay character in the film strangers on
a train the strangeness of their agreement was emphasized by the friction that
it caused between his malignantly Faye Bruno and Granger's golly gee tennis
player guy Haynes in compensation for the death of Bruno's despised father guy
agreed to take the life of Bruno's undesirable wife and put an end to guy's
marriage Bruno's homosexuality emerged in phrases that would be used
progressively during the 50s to describe gays as aliens because of his icy
demeanor his dark imagination and the elitist superiority that he exuded he was
an extension of the clever but lethal archetype Philip and Brandon the lovers in
rope were warped individuals who murdered out of a belief in their own moral and
intellectual superiority which they believed placed them outside the law by
existing outside the culture such gays were able to deny explicit homosexuality
while at the same time reinforcing specific stereotypes this is how Oscar
Wilde's The Picture of Dorian Gray could reach the screen in 1945 shorn of its
more bizarre sexual implications while offering George Saunders as a symbol of
sophisticated decadence such ghettoized characters pre-saged the gay as alien
images of the 1950s and had their roots in the same anti-intellectualism and
mistrust of difference that had characterized the shaping of Hollywood's image
of the normal American man the view of the homosexual as being alien to his own
Society was also present in the constant deletion of specific homosexuality from
the screen adaptations of literary Works in 1945 Billy Wilder brought Charles
Jackson's novel The Lost weekend to the screen with Ray Milland as the alcoholic
writer Don Burnham in Jackson's novel Burnham's alcoholism stems from a complex
variety of reasons that include a father fixation and a false accusation of his
having had a gay relationship with a college frat brother in Wilder's version of
the Lost weekend however the motivation for Burnham's drinking becomes a simple
case of writer's block the only frames of reference for the majority of gay
people were these covert signals and hidden indicators of homosexuality in
Hollywood movies the majority of gay people learned about themselves mostly
through movies that stated the rest of the world was straight a documentary
entitled word is out which was released in 1977 demonstrated that the majority
of gay people living in the United States had the misconception that they were
the only ones like them in the entire world several years later when the Supreme
Court finally ruled that it wasn't obscene to portray homosexual content on
screen films that were more overtly gay helped pave the way for the
legitimization of homosexual subject matter on screen nonetheless throughout the
early and middle part of the 1950s the invisibility of homosexuality was
enforced with an almost fanatical paranoia the perversity of the outsider the
Oddball or the alien screen character was very noticeable in an era built around
rigid Conformity such as the 1950s the equation between being different in any
way and being gay was easy to see in 1952's my son John Dean Jagger and Helen
Hayes played the distraught parents of a young man who is well not gay but a
communist agent played by Robert Walker when their suspicions about their son's
activities are confirmed it's an American Tragedy suddenly they see their son as
Shifty and unfamiliar a thing with no respect for God or country an unprincipled
monster to whom they can no longer relate the healthy family disappears
blocker's coldness his superiority and his open contempt for his parents and
their way of life conspire to create a perverse unnaturalness in a 1950 New York
Times story The Republican National committee chairman asserted that sexual
perverts who have infiltrated our government in recent years are perhaps as
dangerous as actual Communists by December of that year 4954 suspected
homosexuals had been removed from employment in the federal government the
lavender scare was gripping Washington and with the help of a future president
would soon dig its claws deep into Hollywood as well foreign [Music] in the
early 20th century the United States experienced a period of political
persecution and anxiety known as the Red Scare there were two different eras in
American history that are collectively known as the Red Scare both of which were
marked by widespread anxiety over communism and other leftist ideas the first
Red Scare happened in the wake of World War One and is rarely spoken about and
the second occurred in the midst of the Cold War in the late 1940s and early
1950s to a considerable extent the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution in Russia was to
blame for the onset of the first Red Scare it's no secret that many Americans
especially those in positions of authority were worried about the emergence of
the Soviet Union and the expansion of Communism in Europe in response to this
perceived threat the American government enacted a set of laws intended to limit
the freedoms of those who were either Communists or sympathizers of the
Communist cause the Sedition Act of 1918 was one of the most notorious pieces of
legislation enacted at the time because it made it a crime to criticize is the
government anyone suspected of being a communist or Anarchist was subject to
prosecution under these statutes regardless of whether or not they had committed
any real crimes the American Protective League was one of the several private
groups formed during the first Red Scare with the authority to investigate and
report on suspected subversives during the height of the Red Scare the American
Legion spearheaded a drive to identify and punish suspected traitors after World
War II tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union grew once again
sparking the second Red Scare during this time communism was again considered a
major danger to American democracy and its way of life the inquiry undertaken by
Senator Joseph McCarthy known as the McCarthy hearings was one of the most
important events of the second Red Scare McCarthy claimed to have a list of
people who were either Communist party members or sympathizers and he used his
position in government to initiate a series of Investigations and interrogations
to flush them out dramatic confrontations and high profile charges typified the
McCarthy hearings which had far-reaching effects on American culture many
individuals were punished for their suspected communist links even though there
was no proof to back up the claims Witnesses were questioned under duress
throughout the trials to get them to identify other Communists who were under
suspicion even if they were judged not to be communist supporters many people
were blacklisted and lost their employment as a consequence of the proceedings
because of McCarthy and his associates harsh methods and disregard for due
process the hearings became notorious but the hearings came to an end in 1954
when McCarthy was censured by the senate for his conduct during the
investigations marking the beginning of the end of McCarthy's political career
the hearings are now widely viewed as a dark chapter in American history in 1950
many politicians journalists and citizens thought that homosexuals actually
posed more of a threat to National Security than Communists one columnist argued
there is no record of comparable corruption in American history in a national
radio broadcast noted liberal Elmer Davis said it looks as if the enemies of the
state department and of the administration generally have gotten hold of a more
profitable issue than communism Senator Kenneth weary asked his Senate
colleagues can you think of a person who would be more dangerous to the United
States than a pervert and multiple of President Harry Truman's top advisors
wrote him memos stating the country is more concerned about the charges of
sexuals in government than about Communists in the UK it was just about social
Purity yet in America the existence of gay men specifically was somehow a matter
of life and death historians of the McCarthy period have paid surprisingly
little attention to the lavender scare despite the widespread worry and even
Panic it caused at the time the significance of Party politics and foreign
policy in the emergence of the National Security State is emphasized by
political historians of McCarthyism anti-communism and the establishment of the
National Security State while the role of moral and cultural concerns is
downplayed anytime the lavender scare is discussed it is as an afterthought of
the Red Scare that is so obvious that it doesn't ever need explanation the
overlapping worries of Communism and homosexuality have been largely ignored in
even the most recent examinations of McCarthyism both defenses from the right
and criticisms from the left many people who supported McCarthy back in the
1950s considered the systemic expulsion of gays from the state department and
other government positions to be his most lasting achievement senator Joseph
McCarthy alleged in February of 1950 that there were 205 Communists working in
the state department that's a month under Secretary of State John Purifoy said
that the state department had permitted 91 homosexuals to retire after this some
said the president Harry Truman's government was insufficiently concerned about
the threat posed by homosexuals the Senate started looking into homosexuals
working for the government in June of 1950. although the findings weren't made
public until December throughout that time there was a sharp rise in the number
of government employees let go because of homophobic harassment or
discrimination when asked about quote sexual perverts who have infiltrated our
government in recent years Republican National chairman guy George gabrielson
claimed that they were perhaps as dangerous as the actual Communists however
being homosexual wasn't the only reason they were in danger homosexuals were
observed as security threats because they were believed to be more vulnerable to
Blackmail as top counsel of his Congressional subcommittee McCarthy employed Roy
Cohn who himself was homosexual and died of AIDS decades later because of his
attempts to protect his reputation he insisted that his doctor treat him for
liver cancer so at the same time that his immune system was dying he was
undergoing Cancer Treatments that destroyed what was left of his white blood
cells at the same time he also pulled what strings he could to get on the
experimental HIV medication that was still undergoing medical trials AZT which
destroyed his liver someday we will progress as a community to the point where
the only remaining Legacy of Roy Cohn is as the villain of Tony kushner's iconic
stage play angels in America but we're not quite there yet because Cohn and
McCarthy with the help of FBI director J Edgar Hoover who is also believed to
have been gay were responsible for the dismissal of thousands of gay government
employees and the intimidation of many of their political opponents into Silence
by spreading false allegations about their sexual orientation the state
department revealed that it had dismissed 425 workers due to charges of
homosexuality in the closing months of the Truman Administration in 1953.
McCarthy's anti-communist campaign often fused the second Red Scare with the
lavender scare by using allegations of homosexuality as a smear tactic reporters
were once subjected to the following statement if you want to be against
McCarthy Boys you've got to either be a communist or a  when proof of communist
activity was absent McCarthy allegedly used guilt by association by equating
communism and homosexuality with mental instability the general public and even
politicians had a common view that gays and Communists were both morally weak or
psychologically Disturbed as well as Godless and destructive to traditional
families for instance McCarthy openly discussed two individuals case 14 and case
62 on the senate floor as Communists who posed unsafe risks due to their
homosexuality he said that a high-ranking intelligence officer had informed him
that every active communist is Twisted mentally or physically implying that
those with the peculiar mental twists of homosexuality were more susceptible to
recruitment by Communists many of the male workers at the state department
started to feel uncomfortable even being there because of the Department's new
association with homosexuality they were quite adamant about not being seen in
pairs and they often introduced themselves with words emphasizing their
straightness hi I'm so and so I work for the state department and I'm married
and I have three children executive order 104.50 enacted by President Eisenhower
in 1953 prohibited gays from holding federal government positions and
established security criteria for federal employment as a direct result of these
policies hundreds of only gay State Department employees were outed and fired
about 5 000 gay individuals including private contractors and military personnel
lost their jobs at the federal government as a result of this presidential order
the victims were not only fired from employment but also outed to the public
this presidential order expanded Truman's loyalty program by including sexual
perversion among the actions that disqualified a person from holding a federal
post many new rules and practices were implemented to identify and expel persons
who identify as homosexual lesbian or bisexual it was common practice to conduct
interviews and check for overt displays of homosexual biases as part of these
new methods to detect gaze people were judged guilty not just by connection with
those who frequented the same homosexual clubs as the suspects they may also be
questioned if members of their immediate or extended family had gay Tendencies
or gay connections by the mid-1950s similar repressive and oppressive policies
had been enacted in States and local governments as well expanding bans on
hiring lesbians and gay men to cover 12 million workers more than 20 percent of
the United States labor force all of whom were required to sign Oaths attesting
to their moral Purity in order to obtain or maintain employment but McCarthy's
crew of homophobes were about to have the sites trained on themselves when Roy
Cohn brought on G David shine as Chief consultant to the McCarthy staff
speculation arose that shine and Cohn had a sexual relationship during the Army
McCarthy hearings Cohn denied being closer than an ordinary friend to shine or
having any special interest in him Army Council Joseph Welch seemed to elude to
cohn's sexual orientation throughout the proceedings did you think this came
from Define he might be an expert on that yeah yeah I should say I should say Mr
Senator that a pixie is a close relative of a fairy McCarthy's unwavering
support for cone fueled rumors that the senator was either coerced by his senior
counsel or that their relationship went beyond professional boundaries McCarthy
often engaged in homosexual activities Nevada publisher Hank Greenspun said in
1952 and claimed that he was a regular at the White Horse Inn a Milwaukee gay
nightclub all this attention eventually led to Roy Cohn being removed from his
post alongside McCarthy and helped fuel McCarthy's own downfall in due time the
McCarthy period as a whole came to an end in the middle of the 1950s when Nicole
V young judgment in 1956 significantly reduced the authority to remove anyone
from the federal government with discriminatory grounds however the lavender
scare continued for many more decades the Florida legislative investigative
committee also known as the Johns committee or flick was another manifestation
of the lavender scare that endured established in 1956 the flick lasted until
1964 before being dissolved the committee's mission in Florida was to
investigate and fire homosexual Public School teachers carrying on the lavender
scare and spirit if not entirely in practice and it wasn't until the Obama
Administration that military service for openly gay people was allowed since the
don't ask don't tell policy was just another executive order 104.50 under a
different name but though the lavender scare unofficially came to an end with
the fall of McCarthyism after multiple Decisions by the Supreme Court defang the
senator and left him nothing but a paper tiger The Fear and Loathing toward
homosexuals as well as accused Communists survived much longer in Hollywood even
before McCarthy began his Crusade producers in California had been blacklisting
anyone even remotely connected to Communism thanks to pressure from future
president of the United States Ronald Reagan who was then the president of the
Screen Actors Guild many Hollywood professionals were called to appear before
the house on American Activities Committee in October of 1947. it was announced
that the committee would look into allegations that communist spies and
supporters had planted propaganda in Hollywood movies Walt Disney spoke first
during the proceedings Disney testified that Communists posed a severe danger to
the film business and identified many former employees as possible Communists in
contrast other leading Hollywood figures including director John Houston and
actors Humphrey Bogart Lauren Bacall Judy Garland and Danny Kaye organized the
committee for the First Amendment to protest the government's targeting of the
film industry of the people working in Hollywood that the house on American
Activities Committee was interested in many were accused of being members of the
communist Party USA of the initial witness list of 43 19 declared that they
would not give evidence 11 of the original 19 were questioned by the panel on
Monday October 27th the hearings last phase began and members of the committee
for the First Amendment traveled in from throughout the country to participate
only one of the 11 unfriendly Witnesses writer Bertolt Breck agreed to speak
with the committee after which he fled the country ten others declined claiming
their right to free expression and assembly under the First Amendment the
question are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist party was
one which they flat out refused to answer the committee formally accused these
ten of contempt of congress and began criminal proceedings against them in the
Full House of Representatives the house on American Activities Committee
hearings failed to turn up any evidence that Hollywood was secretly
disseminating communist propaganda but the industry was nonetheless transformed
producers and Studio heads were now on the watch for any and all anti-American
activity fearing further investigation from the government especially ones that
might lead to government censorship which they'd only narrowly avoided decades
before so as Hollywood always does they chose to self-censor before being told
to this began a Crackdown on any directors writers or actors who might be
communist or gay The Echoes of McCarthyism were sounding loudly in the Hollywood
Hills and the association between gay and communist were inseparable by then and
as mentioned in previous episodes Hollywood was more or less stuffed full of gay
men and women working in any one of a multitude of roles in the industry this
resulted in multiple well-respected directors moving to Europe and sending many
more up-and-coming and well-established actors even further into the closet
suddenly films about the fear of extraterrestrials became hot tickets in
Hollywood as a narrative device to help instill fear of anything even slightly
different to the masses of the growing Suburban America these monsters from
outer space were Communists gays and people of color these aliens could be
anything and everything John and Martha were afraid of which thanks to Senator
McCarthy was a lot of things but no theme was more prevalent than the alien
shapeshifter the ones who could live alongside the normal people corrupting them
from within Communists coming for your husbands gays coming for your sons the
Red Scare and the dread of communist infiltration into American culture are
commonly seen as metaphors in the 1956 science fiction classic Invasion of the
Body Snatchers the film has also been seen as a homosexual allegory by any
number of reviewers and Scholars throughout the years the film's narrative
revolves around an extraterrestrial invasion of Earth and the subsequent
infiltration of soulless carbon copy humans developed in pods the Pod
inhabitants begin to symbolize as the film unfolds a society that is driven by
uniformity and tries to eliminate individuality and uniqueness this uniformity
and Conformity theme has been linked to the gay experience in the 1950s ever
since many gay individuals in the past were pressured to conceal their
identities and mask their sexual orientation because of the widespread stigma
associated with being gay at the time the film's depiction of the pod people
paints them as robotic drones devoid a feeling and individuality in addition the
film's characters are a misfit crew that the perceived conventional Society
Rejects and ignores people who insist that something nefarious is occurring are
sometimes branded as insane or paranoid similar to the experiences of gay people
who were frequently disregarded and mocked by the larger society the characters
in this story are members of a minority group who are trying to persuade the
world of a threat that only they can see Invasion of the Body Snatchers is
undoubtedly a film that reflects the societal anxieties of its time and can also
be seen as a powerful gay allegory by exploring themes of Conformity
individuality and marginalization the film speaks to the experiences of many gay
people who struggle to find Acceptance in a society that sought to erase their
differences Invaders from Mars features a similar plot to Invasion of the Body
Snatchers David the film's protagonist is a creative and sensitive young man who
is ridiculed and excluded from school he has a difficult time relating to people
even his own father with whom he has a tense relationship many members of the
queer Community especially around the time the film was released have
experienced feelings of alienation and exclusion similar to those shown in the
film actor Arthur Franz who plays David's father in the film has been speculated
to be homosexual in real life Morris ankrum who was also thought to be gay plays
Dr kelston an investigator of the UFO phenomena there are aspects in Invaders
from Mars that may be seen via a queer lens even if that wasn't the film's
original intent from the underlying ties between the male characters to the
overt themes of possession and Invasion the 1939 film nanochka has also been
interpreted by film critics as an allegory for lesbian desire and love firstly
the character of Nina played by Greta Garbo is a Stern and serious Soviet Envoy
who comes to Paris to supervise a group of three bumbling comrades who have been
sent there to sell Jewels seized during the Russian Revolution Nina is initially
portrayed as cold and unfeeling but she begins to thaw as she falls in love with
the Charming and carefree count Leon dalgol played by Melvin Douglas this
Dynamic of a strict and buttoned up woman being seduced by a more carefree and
flamboyant man is a common Trope in Classic Hollywood films but it also mirrors
the expectation that more manly or serious women would lighten up and go
straight eventually the Assumption among many was after all that the only thing
stopping a lesbian from being a happy Homemaker was finding the right man
finally there is the character of Irma played by Bella Lugosi Irma is portrayed
as a flamboyant and Theatrical figure with a campy and exaggerated manner of
speaking and gesturing while the character is not explicitly identified as queer
the fact that Lugosi himself was bisexual and often played roles with homoerotic
undertones has led some viewers to interpret Irma as a coded representation of
queer desire and from a completely opposite direction we have the notorious Plan
9 from Outer Space from the infamous filmmaker Ed Wood while the film has long
been considered a cinematic disaster it has also been celebrated for its campy
subversive qualities in particular many critics and Scholars have interpreted
the film as a queer allegory one way in which the film can be seen as a queer
allegory is through the character of the alien leader Eros Eros is portrayed as
a flamboyant effeminate figure with his distinctive attire makeup and mannerisms
he moves with a graceful almost poetic quality and his speech is melodramatic
and Theatrical his characterization is so exaggerated that it goes well beyond
mere stereotyping and instead creates a queer icon that challenges and subverts
traditional gender Norms another aspect of the film that can be interpreted as a
queer allegory is its underlying critique of Conformity the plot revolves around
the alien's plan to destroy Earth because they view it as a threat to their own
culture and way of life this can be seen as a commentary on the obsessive forces
of Conformity that queer individuals have often faced the aliens desire for
uniformity and sameness can be read as a metaphor for the societal pressures to
conform to heteronormative standards and expectations and even the internal
expectations of the queer Community finally the film's low budget campy style
can be seen as a celebration of the marginal and the underground in the context
of queer culture Camp has often been used as a way to resist and subvert
dominant cultural norms the film's deliberately bad acting special effects and
overall production value can be seen as a queer refusal to conform to
traditional Hollywood standards or maybe I'm reaching a bit with that one but
suffice to say the 1950s were a time of strict social conformity in America the
culture was dominated by the ideal of the nuclear family where a husband worked
and provided for his wife and children while the wife stayed at home and took
care of the household any deviation from this Norm was considered dangerously
deviant and subject to social ostracization this of course included
homosexuality which was widely seen as a mental illness or a moral failing gay
people in the 1950s faced significant oppression from the dominant culture as
well as legal and social sanctions homosexuality was illegal in every state and
those who were caught engaging in same-sex activities could face imprisonment or
institutionalization in Mental Hospitals in this culture of fear and secrecy gay
people were forced to hide their true selves and Lead double lives whereas
suspected communist agents chose to lead double lives many gay men and women
were also forced into marriages with the opposite sex in order to maintain
appearances and avoid suspicion these marriages were often unhappy and
unfulfilling for both partners and they often ended in divorce or estrangement
this further reinforced the idea that homosexuality was a choice and that gay
people could choose to be straight if they wanted to gays and lesbians were also
subject to violence and discrimination in many areas gay bars were the only
places where they could meet and socialize however these spaces were often
raided by police who would arrest patrons and subject them to violence and
humiliation These Bars were actually rated more often than suspected communist
hideouts gays and lesbians were considered easier targets by the police and
since the government believed a queer person could easily be turned communist
arresting them was killing two birds with one stone the policing of gender norms
and the emphasis on Conformity made it nearly impossible for gays and lesbians
to be themselves and live fulfilling lives it wasn't until the Stonewall riots
of 1969 and the subsequent gay rights movement that things began to change in
America but Hollywood would begin to ease up on the depiction of gay people in
the 1960s but mostly in coded ways but even with deep deep coding there was a
catch anyone confirmed to be gay or even heavily coded to be wouldn't have it
easy and to live a life true to themselves they might just have to die for it
[Music] as the film industry moved away from Suburban Perfection the extensive
efforts made by Hollywood to conceal homosexuality and film during the post-war
lavender scare era began to deteriorate and then Hollywood came to realize that
they were ignoring a large audience no not gays at the time the lifeblood of
Hollywood was relationship dramas Disney and fleisure cartoons and biblical
epics however they ultimately realized that a group of Americans with disposable
income but little to spend it on was being excluded teenagers who were incensed
to fight back against their parents conservative confining outlook on life this
rebellious nature spawned arguably the most famous adolescent dissident film
ever made Rebel Without a Cause the film contained broad Illusions to
alternative sexual behavior and the Alternatives offered by gang ritualism Plato
played by salminio is the Loneliest and most troubled of the three problematic
adolescents in the film the other two being James Dean and Natalie Wood although
he is not accused of it Plato was raised by a domineering housekeeper in the
absence of his father which at the time was considered fertile breeding ground
for homosexuality Plato is a multi-faceted character who challenges traditional
gender and sexuality Norms he's a sensitive and artistic young man who admires
James Dean's gym and aspires to be like him their relationship is not explicitly
sexual but homoerotic tension permeates it Plato's attraction to Jim originates
from his need for a mask role model in his life who can offer him the emotional
support that he lacks at home Jim is a troubled teenager who struggles to blend
in with his peers and family nevertheless Jim's sensitivity and emotional
vulnerability contradict his society's expectations of masculine Behavior he is
also drawn to Plato despite being confined by the street gang culture of the
1950s the writer of the film Stuart stem said the gang in Rebel Without a Cause
isn't much different from the Army both the rituals are tribal the affection and
gang Behavior has to be hidden inside a different vocabulary both spoken and
unspoken inside gestures and Words which desensitized everything and made
everything brutal also they had to wear skins to keep the image intact boots and
leather they had to put on a horse skin in order to feel defended against the
discovery of their own Sensitivity I don't know what other experiences in World
War II were but for us it was deliberate and conscious we were told that the
buddy system prevailed the choice of a buddy was as or more critical than that
of a bride you'd be living in a kind of physical intimacy which was unlike any
other men were having the experience of never having been so close to other men
and there was something of that love operating within the structure of the
teenage gang whose members had left home where there wasn't much love to fight
each other in the streets fighting may have been a pretext for being close and
Rebel Without a Cause when Jim and Buzz another gang Associated teen decided to
enter a chicken race to the edge of a cliff a race in which buzz will die the
two regard each other for a moment and question their participation in such an
event their encounter becomes the motivation for all that follows Jim refuses to
deny his feelings and in the screenplay stem uses the character's guilt and
grief over the death of Buzz as a weapon against Conformity one of the things I
wanted to show in Rebel is that underneath all the macho defense there was that
Pure Drive for affection and didn't matter who the recipient might be there was
a longer time in those days for young men to be in that Warrior phase where a
lot of romantic attachments were formed before heterosexual encounters happened
my favorite moment in the film is not between Jim and Plato but between Jim and
Buzz who dies in the chicken race it was tender and loving and the killing of
that boy whom Jim had known for all of 12 minutes motivated the entire last half
of the film additionally Rebel Without a Cause challenges the conventional
gender roles of women in society as well Natalie Wood portrays Judy Jim's
girlfriend who struggles to find her position in a man's world Judy's
relationship with Jim is complicated because they struggle to express their
emotions to one another however Judy's character is also noteworthy because she
challenges conventional Notions of femininity she opposes the role of the
passive submissive woman in favor of asserting her autonomy and agency the
release of pent-up emotions due to this type of emotional repression is what
ultimately kills buzz and Plato while Jim is secure in Judy's arms clearly adult
responsibilities include settling down in a heterosexual relationship contrary
to the illusions of your teenage years homosexuality is deemed ignorable until
the end of adolescence after that it's considered a sort of sign of Arrested
Development as we entered the latter half of the 1950s and beginning of the
1960s this appeared to be Hollywood's perspective on homosexuality as well
theoretically gay characters could exist in Hollywood films but only with one of
two conclusions either they straighten themselves out or they die and Hollywood
was not hesitant to make films expressing this to the audience burying your gaze
in media has existed for much longer than Twitter and Tumblr may think TN
sympathy is a classic example of repression through coercion the play and film
have become so emblematic of the traditional remedy for homosexuality securing
the love of a decent woman in the nick of time that people have forgotten that
it's actually a tale about a timid heterosexual Robert Anderson who adapted his
own play for the big screen in 1956 employs the classic Outsider archetype of
the man who marches to the beat of a different drummer and must endure the red
ridicule of his peers in neither the film nor the play as it ever suggested that
the sensitive student Tom Lee might prefer men over women the issue at hand is
the allegation of homosexuality Lee's classmates Call Him Sister boy because
like Jim from Rebel Without a Cause he refuses to run with the pack Tom prefers
Bach to baseball and the companionship of his housemaster's wife Laura to touch
football his male tormentors disregard the fact that he is obviously in love
with the Elder woman because he does not fit the stereotypical male role in the
Vincent Minnelli film the majority of the accusatory remarks about homosexuality
were toned down Thomas found swimming nude with a teacher who is also suspected
of being gay in the play in the film he's labeled queer because he's discovered
stitching a button onto his shirt while lounging on the seashore with a group of
Faculty spouses the suppressed homosexuality of Tom's primary Tormentor the
masculine housemaster played by Leif Erickson who married Laura to establish his
masculinity is also subdued in the film adaptation Ericsson disregards Laura in
favor of the young male Macho pupils that he instructs in Tea and Sympathy a
heterosexual youth is falsely accused of homosexuality by adults whose sporting
activities provide the most homoerotic action on screen Tom Blends in well as a
scapegoat Femme in the well-established friendships between his classmates
therefore the film Advocates tolerance not for sexual deviation but for
disadvantaged heterosexuals who are less masculine never is homosexuality
considered a viable option for a genuine man the message is that one cannot
presume a young man is homosexual solely on the basis of his football
performance when Laura ultimately sleeps with Tom she is not sparing him from a
life of sissiness but rather from his own fear that his classmates may be
correct about his sexuality a fear that has already led him to attempt suicide
writer Robert Anderson said to me it was never a play about homosexuality when
Leif Erickson hounds Tom Lee he's really persecuting what he fears in himself
Tea and Sympathy which again was not about homosexuality nevertheless served as
a lesson for a generation of gay men who perceived Tom Lee's tormentors pointed
accusations not as timid heterosexuals but as horrified homosexuals the film was
able to convey a portion of what actual homosexuals felt and experienced in the
1950s while staying faithful to the cultural imperative of invisibility cultural
necessity was of course in the hands of the production code and there was never
any thought given to making the homosexuality in Tian sympathy moreovert in the
film even the prospect that someone could be gay in reality was eliminated prior
to the commencement to filming Deborah Kerr wrote to Vincent Minnelli the Breen
office is very difficult about the homosexual angle which is I understand their
objection adultery is okay impotence is okay but perversion is their bet Noir in
fact adultery was not okay and so it came under attack from the Catholic Legion
of decency anyway the all already altered ending of Tea and Sympathy had to be
made to reflect the necessary retribution for Laura's affair with Tom thus the
finished movie taught that instruction and initiation by an older woman was a
positive thing but that at the same time such Behavior could not be condoned at
least not for the woman Laura gives herself to Tom undoes the top button of her
blouse and says years from now when you talk about this and you will be kind
this is how the stage version concludes the fall of the curtain left the
conclusion of the encounter to the audience's imagination this however was not
good enough for Hollywood it filmed the seduction scene with a subdued reverence
reminiscent of a church service the way the scene was filmed in the woods with
the birds chirping and the special lighting made it appear more like the second
coming of Christ than the first coming of Tom Lee a glaring epilogue provides
the morally correct conclusion that makes the preceding material acceptable to
the Legion of decency at his class reunion 10 years later Tom wears the largest
gold wedding band ever observed up close on film Tennessee Williams stepped up
to the plate to provide what became yet another comment on the foreign gay twice
previously Williams's plays were adapted for the big screen with significant
homosexual references removed in each instance the adapters asserted that the
homosexual aspects of the play were not needed from a dramatic point of view in
1951 the pro problem that Blanche Dubois encountered with her husband was
omitted from the film adaptation of A Streetcar Named Desire in 1958 the
homosexual implications in the relationship between brick and the deceased
Skipper were removed from Cat on a Hot Tin Roof in both instances The Producers
emphasized that homosexuality was not the point and was readily discarded in
favor of more acceptable explanations then in 1959 two years before the
production code was actually revised to permit homosexual subject matter on
screen Suddenly Last Summer dealt with the subject as a psychosexual circus act
as the 1950s almost demanded the homosexuality of Sebastian Venable Williams's
condemned poet could be inferred but not shown if the brainoff is granted
special permission as a consequence of the combination of insanity and
cannibalism the film had an unpleasant sickly Ambiance that made everyone
involved approach it with caution Catherine Hepburn who portrayed Violet Venable
Sebastian's deranged mother publicly conveyed her disdain for the topic Ken
Geist the biographer of director Joseph mankiewicz claims that mankowitz and
Spencer Tracy spent the greater part of an evening in Boston explaining
homosexuality to Catherine Hepburn but she flatly refused to believe that such
people existed she need not have made such a commotion over Suddenly Last Summer
though in a meeting with producer Sam Spiegel and screenwriter Gore Vidal the
Breen office eliminated all references to homosexual relationships Gore Vidal
said my script was perfectly explicit and then the Catholic Church struck the
Legion of decency after seeing that the necessary Cuts were made gave the film a
special classification since the film illustrates the horrors of such a
lifestyle it can be considered moral in theme even though it deals with sexual
perversion it was resolved that Sebastian Venable would not appear in person in
the film according to Vidal he was destined to be a glimmer an occasion for
memory with this decision Hollywood had accomplished the unthinkable it has
portrayed an invisible gay man on screen in the film Elizabeth Taylor's
character Catherine recounts how she and Sebastian spent their days in a Spanish
Hamlet on the seashore and discloses that Sebastian used her to seduce young men
Sebastian's efforts were effective due to the boy's desperation for cash however
when he began to make preparations for his departure to Northern Europe
Sebastian and Catherine were accosted by a group of youths pleading for money on
a scorching day when Sebastian rebuffed their advances they pursued him through
the city streets Sebastian attempted to flee but the boys followed him wherever
he went in the meantime Catherine had been feverishly attempting to catch up to
Sebastian but when she finally did she found him surrounded by men Catherine
claims that they tore Sebastian apart limb by limb and ate him Henry Hart a film
critic discussed the origins of Suddenly Last Summer in the January 1960 issue
of films in review it is said that Tennessee Williams wrote Suddenly Last Summer
when a psychiatrist advised him that for his own sake not to mention societies
he had better stop denigrating normality and begin to expose the evils of
homosexuality and its Allied forms of Vice this Williams did regardless of
whether the advice actually came from a therapist Williams's tormented depiction
of a flailing homosexual artist and the individuals he victimizes with his
aberrant impulses is a classic horror Tale the creature is finally destroyed by
an angry mob of Street Urchins in a climax similar to that of James Wales
Frankenstein in which the peasants pursue the monster to the top of a hill where
he is consumed by Flames what emerged from Suddenly Last Summer was a simple
horror film with a budget a film with a high moral tone that was ultimately
unable to investigate its own subject but even the overt mention of
homosexuality in a film starring Catherine Hepburn and Elizabeth Taylor shook
the foundations on which the production codes aversion to homosexuality stood
the erosion of the power of the production code to maintain specific taboos had
begun at the outset of the 1950s and was only eroding Evermore as time went on
the California state Supreme Court ruled in early 1959 after analyzing a case
involving a screening of Kenneth anger's fireworks that homosexuality is older
than Sodom and Gomorrah and is a legitimate subject for screen treatment if
handled properly the ruling overturned the conviction of an exhibitor who had
been fined 250 dollars and sentenced to three years probation for displaying the
film fireworks in 1957. variety referred to fireworks as an attempt to convey
through impressionism the homosexual outlook on life in general and noted that
the court opinion stated that homosexuality is not to be endorsed but Society
must understand its causes and effects after homosexuality as a subject reached
commercial film houses seven years later Kenneth anger Scorpio Rising was
eventually released in theaters albeit specialized Art House theaters such as
New York's Bleaker Street Cinema and caused a similar stir once more the film
was interpreted to symbolize homosexual life and attitudes in General Andrew
Saras drew a homophobic conclusion after viewing Scorpio rising in the Village
Voice and observing that anger Compares a depraved homosexual orgy to footage
from an ancient film about the Life of Christ why the parallel with Christ what
else is there for attractive homosexuals over the age of 30 besides crucifixion
the treatment of fireworks and Scorpio Rising by the courts Distributors and
critics indicated how the code would ultimately evolve even in enlightened
circles homophobia was far too pervade and unchallenged for homosexual themed
films to be evaluated objectively based solely on their cinematic Merit there
would be no recognition of the legitimacy of gay subject matter only a
condescension to a an intermediate adult audience Hollywood was determined to
reach without alienating the old fogies Spartacus was one of the last commercial
films to have homosexuality expunged from its script before the code was amended
in a scene between crassius and his adolescent subordinate antoninus who did not
look like an adolescent the elder man discreetly establishes his preference for
both men and women do you eat oysters when I have the master do you eat snails
no master do you consider the eating of oysters to be modeled and the eating of
snails to be immoral my taste includes both snails and oysters this exchange was
excised from the finished film immediately followed by antoninus's departure to
join Spartacus and the other slaves in Revolt what is therefore lost is any
indication of antoninus's dread of having a homosexual relationship with
crassius the fear that causes antoninus to flee at that time so it just kind of
comes out of nowhere such omissions prompted producers and writers in the film
industry to lament that the code restricted their artistic freedom and prevented
Hollywood films from competing in the mature marketplace with foreign films that
dealt with such subject matters openly at the beginning of the 1960s the
prohibition against sex perversion was the only specific restriction on subject
matter still in place for movie censorship the merch company co-producers of
William Wyler's The Children's Hour launched a meticulously orchestrated
campaign in the summer of 1961 to prepare the public for the inevitable they
disclosed that Wyler's second adaptation of Lillian Hellman's play would restore
lesbian implications to the story which had been adapted in 1936 with all such
references glaringly absent in the film former College classmates Martha Doby
and Karen Wright established a private residential school for girls in the early
1960s Karen agrees on a wedding date with her boyfriend a doctor Joe Carden
after two years of Engagement Joe is related to the powerful Emilia Tilford
whose granddaughter Mary attends the school Mary is a Pampered manipulative
adolescent who abuses her peers while Mary is being disciplined for a lie she
told one of her companions overhears Martha and her aunt Lily arguing Lily
accuses Martha of having an unnatural relationship with Karen Mary shares this
information with her grandmother Mary fails to convince others that she
personally witnessed Martha and Karen interacting but compels Rosalie another
girl to confirm her story by using her knowledge that Rosalie has stolen jewelry
and other personal items from a number of people around the school tiny little
blackmailer Mrs Tilford is sued for libel and slandered by the two women but a
few months later Martha and Karen have lost the suit and are sequestered at the
school having lost all of their pupils and suffering irreparable damage to their
reputations as a result of the loss Karen breaks off her engagement with Joe
after he inquires as to whether the rumors are true or not and Martha explains
that other female couples have persevered despite being discovered due to the
intensity of their love and then confesses that she actually is in love with
Karen and has been in love with her for years oh it's just as long as I can
remember but I never knew what it was until all this happened Karen asserts that
Martha's sentiments are merely confused but Martha insists that it's love while
breaking down into tears Mary's deception regarding Martha and Karen is exposed
when Rosalie's mother discovers the stolen items her daughter has retained Mrs
Tilford tells the judge who then reverses the outcome of the litigation and
decides to publish results in the newspaper and pay the teachers a full
Financial settlement but everything has come too late and Karen discovers that
Martha has hanged herself in her room a year later the political drama film
advised in consent based on Alan drury's Pulitzer prize-winning novel of the
same name was released the film examines the intricate and frequently
treacherous world of politics in Washington DC where a nomination for secretary
of state becomes the Battleground for personal and political agendas while the
film predominantly focuses on political Intrigue and Corruption the character of
Senator Anderson portrayed by Don Murray discreetly investigates homosexual
themes young Utah senator Anderson is designated chairperson of the committee
responsible for assessing the Secretary of State nominee proposed by the
president as the confirmation hearings continue Anderson begins to suspect that
the nominee May Harbor communist sympathies which could compromise National
Security however Anderson's personal life is scrutinized when he is coerced by a
former male admirer who threatens to reveal their past relationship if Anderson
does not withdraw his opposition to the nomination the film's portrayal of
homosexuality is nuanced but it emphasizes the personal and professional dangers
gay people confronted in a society that was still primarily antagonistic toward
them at the time Senator Anderson is portrayed as a sympathetic figure who
struggles with the contradictions between his private and public lives he is
conflicted between his responsibility as a senator to safeguard the nation and
his desire to live an authentic existence as a gay man the film illustrates how
his sexual orientation could be used against him not only by political
adversaries but also by those who sought to exploit his vulnerability for
personal gain in the end Anderson's wife receives Anonymous phone messages from
a man warning that if the subcommittee does not report favorably on the nominee
information about what occurred between Anderson and Rey in Hawaii will be made
public an anxious Anderson travels to New York to meet a fellow Army veteran
named Ray shaft shaft confesses to selling evidence of a previous gay
relationship between the two leading to Anderson suicide the film victim was
released the same year Melville Farr played by Dirk Bogard appears to be a
successful London attorney in a loving marriage but he conceals his sexual
orientation from everyone when his ex-lover Barrett contacts him for assistance
in paying off some blackmailers he disregards his requests Barrett has stolen
money from his employers and has been apprehended by law enforcement knowing
that his sexual orientation would soon be revealed he commits suicide in his
jail cell Farr now plagued with remorse resolves to take on the blackmailing
organization but each of the victims he approaches refuses to assist preferring
to pay the money to keep their private lives hidden knowing that Dirk Bogart
himself lived his life as a closeted gay man makes victim all the more poignant
from a retrospective standpoint those who were familiar with the industry at the
time claimed that his refusal to enter into a marriage of convenience hindered
his prospects at a successful career in Hollywood Hollywood continued to produce
similar Works throughout the 1960s and Beyond despite widespread criticism of
these and other films that perpetuated the barrier gaze Trope numerous lgbtq
plus activists and Advocates viewed the trend as evidence of a hostile broader
cultural and political climate towards the community as a whole they argue that
the Trope contributed to a culture of dread and shame surrounding queer
identities and reinforced detrimental stereotypes of queer individuals as ill
immoral and dangerous the practice however persisted well into the New
Millennium but there was a faint glimmer of hope on the horizon as the 60s came
to a close with the Stonewall uprisings ultimately bringing the lives of gay
people to the attention of the general public and then the gay inclusive x-rated
Midnight Cowboy won the Oscar for Best Picture the Norms surrounding the
depiction of gay characters in film began to disintegrate gay people could now
exist in Hollywood good but for how long [Music] the boys in the band is a 1970
American film directed by William friedkin of Exorcist Fame based on the 1968
Off-Broadway play of the same name by Mark Crowley the film takes place in New
York City in 1968 and follows a group of gay friends who gather for a birthday
party the main character is Michael a neurotic and self-loathing gay man who is
hosting the party for his friend Harold a flamboyant and witty gay man as the
night wears on the guests become increasingly drunk and confrontational leading
to heated arguments and Revelations about their personal lives the arrival of a
straight friend Alan adds to the tension as he is uncomfortable with the gay
culture and the open homosexuality on display as the night progresses the
character's relationships with each other become more complicated leading to a
climactic confrontation that exposes their vulnerabilities and insecurities on
the strength of a classy set of New York stage reviews and its billing as a
comedy despite its dead serious serious content the boys in the band was taken
for gospel in an America populated by people who had never met a homosexual in
their entire lives the film was not positive but it was fair the only
heterosexual character Alan can easily despise the Nelly Emery because he is
everything a gay is supposed to be a butterfly in heat Alan even comes to pity
The Battered in the end but what scares Alan and the audience what they could
not come to terms with or understand is the homosexuality of Hank and Larry who
are both just as Queer as Emery yet look just as straight as Alan the
possibility that there could be non-stereotypical homosexuals who are also
staunch Advocates of a working gay relationship is presented by the two lovers
throughout the film and they are the two characters most often ignored by
critics and analysts it is Larry who speaks of rejecting heterosexual concepts
of marriage and creating a relationship with respect for one another's freedoms
with no need to lie or pretend at the end of the film Larry and Hank win a
telephone Truth game that Michael has viciously devised when they call each
other and say I love you it is when Larry and Hank Express affection for each
other physically and verbally that the audience and the lone straight party
guests are most uncomfortable in contrast Michael's inability to deal with his
own homosexuality is exposed as old-time movie melodrama and Harold's final
equally melodramatic speech puts it into perspective you're a homosexual and you
don't want to be but there's nothing you can do to change it not all your
prayers to your God not all the analysis you can buy in all the years you've got
left to live you may very well one day be able to know a heterosexual life if
you want it desperately enough if you pursue it with the fervor with which you
annihilate but you'll always be homosexual as well always Michael always the
speech encapsulated self-hatred and reflected a generation of gay men who were
indoctrinated to blame their problems all on their homosexuality in the end
Michael's self-hatred and inability to function became as archaic as Harold's
habit of putting his weed in a Band-Aid box in the Medicine Chest so that he
could flush it down the toilet in case the cops arrived Michael's weeping fits
and old movie Visions Shone light not on his homosexuality but on the fallacies
and illusions of Hollywood dreams dreams that had taught gay men that they were
not welcome in polite Society Hollywood was not moved to change a wit by all of
this hysteria in gay drawing rooms in Manhattan though yet boys in the band
moved gay men throughout the country the internalized guilt and self-hatred of
eight gay men at a Manhattan birthday party formed the best and most potent
argument for Gay Liberation ever offered in popular media it provided actual and
personal instances of the detrimental repercussions of what gay men learn about
themselves through media falsehoods and the film sparked the first public
pushback by a budding gay rights movement against Crowley's plays accepted
prejudices gay protesters did not deny the existence of such stereotypes but
they were quick to point out that the Viewpoint was one-sided and the Prejudice
is defined as the sole depiction or representation of any group of people by a
minority stereotype the boys in the band was a movie about gays and a gay movie
it was a creation born of a subculture and reflected a harsh reflection Society
viewed it as if it were a scientific trip but it was an interior Journey for
many gays who were shocked by the sadness of Michael's sickening rituals many of
Crowley's caricatures were misconceptions that gays had accepted and even fit
themselves into since there seemed to be no other option the audience for boys
in the band included gay people who had grown up thinking that they were the
only gays in the world the film explored passing and not being able to pass
loving and not being able to love and above all else surviving in a world that
denied one's very existence but it did so before an American public that was at
the stage of barely being able to mention homosexuality at all within a few
years of boys in the band there was summer wishes Winter Dreams in which Joanne
Woodward's Sons homosexuality is solely perceived in terms of how it impacts her
current midlife crisis as yet another sign of her failure as a wife and mother
she eventually comes to terms with it but her son leaves for Amsterdam with a
friend and refuses to visit his parents until they can live with him as he truly
is he makes their reluctance to recognize him as a full person their problem a
family affair rather than his a very natural thing the first film with
homosexual Liberation themes designed for commercial distribution was then
released in 1973. the film investigated the possibilities available to gay
couples on society's terms and raised the questions how do two guys who refuse
to play society's game Define a non-roll-based relationship while the film was
inspired by the Gay Liberation movement it was dismissed as a trivial soap opera
by The Establishment press and Savaged by gay liberationists for its romantic
Illusions and lack of radical conviction David an ex-seminarian teaches School
in New York City and settles into a monogamous relationship with Mark a straight
identified insurance salesman in the film the first part of the movie examines
their meeting romance Union and split the relationship is a protracted and
planned Love Story parody in which they go to the Opera roll in the fall leaves
in Central Park watch each other shave in the morning and imitate every
heterosexual movie cliche about love and marriage the connection ends due to
Mark's reluctance to be possessed and David's nagging fears David investigates
the Alternatives in the second half of the film promiscuous sex and Fire Island
bath houses and orgies are as unsatisfactory to him as his persistent loneliness
David meets Jason a divorce photographer who helps him begin to alter his
Notions about the nature of homosexual relationships Freedom From The Assumption
of roles in an unstructured relationship is difficult to depict on film in a
poetic style without inviting skepticism but the filmmakers were aware of this
and purposefully opted to regard romance as the bottom line as a result of the
filmmakers couching his message in such endlessly romantic terms the picture
enraged the same people fighting for such a political redefinition a very
natural thing had such significant promotion and distribution issues that it had
little influence however it is still viewed as a breakthrough film in queer
Cinema Theory classes the New York Post described it as an argument rather than
entertainment while Judith Christ said if the Gay Liberation movement wants its
own mediocre movie here it is elsewhere in cinemas John Schlesinger's Sunday
Bloody Sunday was a poignant understanding and interesting story that has
consistently been cited since as an example of a good gay film that failed to
make it at the box office proof that homosexuality is not a money-making
proposition in movie terms the problem however was in the packaging Sunday
Bloody Sunday was a talky introspective British production that wasn't intended
for a wide audience in the United States it was noted in the 1980s that there
appears to be very little room in the American Market anymore for the small but
interesting film according to producers and writers this is now the specialty of
Television films interesting how history repeats itself as small and interesting
now seems to be the Forte of streaming services this film Schlesinger said is
not about the sexuality of these people these movies never seem to be about the
sexuality of the people in them these people were a gay doctor a straight career
lady and a bisexual artist with whom they were both in love Sunday Bloody Sunday
was not about sexuality as Schlesinger correctly said however it was a film in
which alternative sexuality was taken for granted something that gay activists
had long sought it was a film on human relationships and how they do not always
correspond to our expectations of what love should be the film portrayed a
joyful ending for a gay character whose boring resignation is not the result of
his homosexuality in his final monologue he informs the audience they say it
never made you happy and I said but I am happy apart from missing him all my
life I've been looking for somebody courageous resourceful he's not it but
something we were something but America despised Sunday Bloody Sunday one kiss
between the men created even more controversy than scenes of them in bed
together male male relationships were characterized by nothing but sex yet
genuine love between men was frowned upon in most eyes and it was the first time
on screen when a loving kiss between two men was not intended to shock or
repulse in American Cinema it drew gasps from Spectators and as a result several
theaters refused to book the film at all however it provided gay moviegoers with
a mostly positive experience even if they were the only people in the theater
aside from the more serious gay films gays were popping up in small roles all
over Hollywood mostly As comedic foils perhaps most famously in Mel Brooks's The
Producers but all of this laughter was lost on the national gay task force which
issued a set of guidelines for Studios to follow including homosexuality isn't
funny use the same rules you have for other minorities if bigots don't get away
with it if they hate Catholics they they can't get away with it if they hate
gays stereotypical people do exist but if such a minority of any group receives
exclusive media exposure that is bigotry hmm television which is subject to the
regulation of the FCC and to the reaction of its advertisers to vocal public
opinion was more vulnerable to this type of activist pressure than was the
motion picture industry television programming which aired nearly 24 hours a day
was always in need of societal concerns to address homosexuality being one of
them a film must be a success but if a television show fails there is always
next week and another subject to try therefore experimentation was encouraged
pressure from Gay Liberation influenced television's approach to portraying
homosexuality for the American audience and it was successful in achieving a
more balanced and surely more prolific discourse on television than in film
Archie Bunker Norman lear's Charming bigot first encountered homosexuality in
1972 when he realized that one of his drinking buddies a former football star
was gay how long you know me 10 12 years yeah in all that time did I ever
mention a woman but what difference does that make you a bachelor so I know but
pastors there they're always acting kind of private exactly oh come on watching
from the White House President Nixon declared it distasteful because it made a
good man look like a fool it is unclear if Nixon was talking about Archie Bunker
or the football player that same year ABC made a significant step forward in the
portrayal of ordinary gay men on television that certain summer a two-hour movie
of the week presented the story of a divorced dad who chooses to tell his 14
year old son that he is gay when his son arrives for a weekend visit when the
father eventually gets around to describing the issue to his son the boy rushes
away unable to deal with it for gay liberationists The Narrative was a little
too soft while it earned glowing reviews in the mainstream press several gay
writers criticize it for being too hesitant and unduly cautious but with the
critical success of that certain summer the barriers seemed to come crashing
down for television by the mid-1970s queer characters had appeared on virtually
every sitcom drama and talk show in prime time TV All in the Family Rhoda mod
Barney Miller Mash The Bob Newhart Show and scores of others featured gay
characters the naked civil servant and the war Widow two spectacular television
dramas were uplifting depictions of the lives of lgbtq people both real and
fictitious both series instilled in its key characters a sense of history and
their position as strugglers for sexual Freedom both shows revealed a hidden
aspect of the gay experience through romance and humor although Quinton crisp's
story in the naked civil servant was not a gay liberationist's Dream by any
means gay is greatly admired and respected crisp's defiant lifestyle when you're
being followed there are a number of rules to obey never look back [Applause] on
no account run [Music] gradually increase the pace to five miles an hour [Music]
if this does not deter him do not stop until forcibly stop stand still and look
at him it may work Studio Do You Think You Are be very polite it may work no one
really sir offer money it may work yet no gay Heroes emerged on the movie screen
at least not until the release of Dog Day Afternoon the film directed by Sydney
lament and starring Al Pacino is a complex and nuanced exploration of the queer
experience set during a bank robbery gone awry in Brooklyn the film tells the
story of Sunny a man who Robs a Bank in order to pay for Leon's Sunny's Partners
gender confirmation surgery Leon isn't given a feminine name in the movie FYI as
the story unfolds we learn more about sunny and Leon's relationship we discover
that Leon is a pre-op trans woman and sunny is willing to do whatever it takes
to support her including robbing a bank to fund the procedure this is a powerful
statement about the lengths that queer people will go to in order to support and
care for one another especially in a society that is often hostile and
unwelcoming the film also explores the impact of queer identity on the
character's relationships with their families when Sonny's mother comes to the
bank to try and talk him out of the robbery he reveals to her that Leon is a
trans woman her reaction is one of shock and disgust another important queer
theme in Dog Day Afternoon is the way that Sunny sexuality and gender identity
intersect with his working class background throughout the film we see Sunny
interacting with other members of his community including his friends and the
police officers who are trying to negotiate with him his working class
background is an important part of his identity and it's clear that he feels a
sense of loyalty and connection to his community something not often seen among
queer characters who were usually artists or working in fields of high esteem
like universities made for a budget of 3.5 million dollars it went on to gross
56 million dollars at the box office or 381 million dollars when adjusted for
inflation and was nominated for six Oscars including best picture bursting the
bubble of the assumption that movies with queer characters and themes can't
succeed but Al Pacino returned to gay Cinema five years later with cruising
which did not go over so well cruising was based on a 1970 novel by the New York
Times editor Gerald Walker that portrayed the process by which a New York city
policeman assigned to capture a psychotic killer of gay men becomes aware of his
own homosexuality and then commences killing gay men the gay characters in the
novel are all filled with self-hatred and hatred for the people who turned them
gay the blame usually falls on the first man with whom they had sex the killer
Intimates that the homosexual lifestyle is an inherently violent one the killer
in the film adaptation knifes his victims to death during or immediately
following sex and the film opens with a shot of a gangrenous severed arm
floating in the Hudson River Al Pacino's character a cop immerses himself in the
underground of heavy leather and sadomasochism as the film goes on he becomes
agitated and Restless a state brought about by his own sexual identity crisis
though his motives are never explored or explained when he finally locates the
killer he stabs him which puts the killer in the hospital under police custody
Pacino's assignment is over however another murder follows this time that of
Pacino's gay next door neighbor who was the only relatively happy gay character
in the movie it is implied in the end that Pacino himself had committed this
final murder and the film ends with him gazing at himself in a mirror in a
statement to the press the director screenwriter William friedkin of boys in the
band said that he was not sure who the real murderer was and that furthermore he
did not consider the murderer to be homosexual a more likely conclusion is that
friedkin deliberately obscured the identity of the killer either consciously or
unconsciously as a response so the wave of protests that arose in the summer of
1979 when he began filming gays who protested the making of the film maintained
that it would show that when Pacino recognized his attraction to the homosexual
world he would become psychotic and begin to kill so freedkin avoided that
situation by leaving the ending of the film relatively ambiguous yet friedkin
realized that his film said what gay activists claimed it said and he had a
disclaimer to all Prince of the film this film is not intended as an indictment
of the homosexual world it is set in one small segment of that world which is
not meant to be representative of the whole gay audiences around this time began
to see that Hollywood was willing to overlook successful queer films but would
admire themselves in their failures the most insightful and important films were
those which had been made in struggle by small groups of people and against
tremendous odds the producers and directors of the British film Nighthawks spent
five years preparing and Gathering funds for their film about a gay teacher who
spends his nights cruising in bars and discos and having one-night stands
Nighthawks offers an almost documentary style look into the evening cityscape of
the ritualistic life of a man who is becoming aware that he lives two lives the
dispassionate view of London gay nightlife allows a gay male audience to
experience the hunt as more than a passive spectator there is an uncanny feeling
that each member of the audience is himself cruising recognizing a look a
gesture a glance then realizing it is meant for the character in the film
through whose eyes we are looking no slick and Sensational Hollywood Peep Show
Nighthawks is a perceptive film with modest intentions and it succeeded without
compromising its scope for commercial reasons while William friedkin was on New
York streets filming the blood and guts Hollywood version of the gay underground
Nighthawks opened in New York and got what turned out to be better reviews than
cruising would get six months later and some queer filmmakers were willing not
just a step outside of the Hollywood System but all over it John Waters became
synonymous with the queer underground Cinema movement of the 1970s thanks to his
outrageous and subversive style Waters films are known for their irreverent
humor over the top characters and outrageous subject matter he has always been
drawn to the marginalized and the taboo and his films often explore themes of
sexuality gender and identity many of his films feature queer characters and he
has been credited with helping to break down barriers and challenge stereotypes
about queer people especially the messy ones and we love a messy queer waters's
film female trouble released in 1974 is a classic example of his queer Cinema
the film follows the story of Don Davenport played by the Divine Divine who is a
rebellious teenager with a troubled home life she runs away from home and
becomes involved in a series of crimes ultimately leading to her downfall the
film features a cast of characters that includes drag queens sex workers and
other Outsiders who challenge societal Norms of gender and sexuality another
notable film in waters Canon is desperate living the film takes place in a
fictional town called mortville where the residents are all social outcasts and
deviants the film features a cast of characters that includes a lesbian couple a
transgender woman and a group of militant feminists the film is a dark comedy
that explores themes of power privilege and oppression and most iconically
there's Pink Flamingos the queerness of this film is evident in the way it
portrays its characters and its themes and it remains a potent example of the
power of queer Cinema to disrupt and subvert all expectations Gentlemen of the
press get ready cause you are about to witness the biggest news event of the
year live homicide one of the most striking aspects of Pink Flamingos is the way
it portrays its Central character Divine is a larger than life figure both in
terms of her physical appearance and her personality she is a force of nature
unapologetically embracing her own queerness and challenging anyone who tries to
limit or control her her sexuality is fluid and she engages in relationships
with both men and women throughout the film in addition to its portrayal of
queer characters Pink Flamingos also explores themes that are Central to the
queer experience the film's focus on Outsiders and those who are marginalized by
mainstream Society is a recurring theme throughout with characters like Divine
and her cohorts living on the fringes of society and rejecting traditional norms
at the same time Pink Flamingos is also a celebration of queer culture and a
testament to the power of queer resilience despite the violence and degradation
they face Divine and her cohorts remain defiant refusing to be cowed by the
oppressive forces of society their queerness is a source of strength and a way
of connecting with others who share their experiences creating a sense of
community and belonging in the face of adversity content warning though Waters
films are also notable for their celebration of Camp a style that Embraces
theatricality and excess water's influence on the world of film and popular
culture is undeniable he has inspired countless artists and filmmakers and his
work has been celebrated for its subversive and irreverent humor his films have
also helped to pave the way for a greater representation of queer characters and
stories in mainstream media by challenging societal norms and pushing boundaries
Waters has left an indelible mark on the world of Cinema and Beyond these queer
under underground films opened the minds of many who wanted nothing to do with
queer people throughout the 1970s we continued to appear on some of the most
popular TV shows in the world such as Dallas and mash and in 1979 came the
groundbreaking documentary before Stonewall the documentary combines archival
footage interviews with queer activists and Scholars and personal accounts to
Chronicle the history of the queer community in America it highlights the
experiences of queer people in different regions of the country and in various
spheres of society including the Arts politics and even Sports one of the
documentary's key strengths is its emphasis on diversity in the queer Community
the film showcases the lives of people like Bayard Rustin a gay African-American
civil rights leader who worked with Martin Luther King and Sylvia Rivera a
transgender activist who played a significant role in The Stonewall riots film
and television were now being used to show the world that we were people complex
and diverse and with a burgeon and queer political power structure rising up in
California New York and DC as well as a crop of new gay filmmakers beginning to
be noticed by Hollywood it seemed like we were ready to tear down those closet
doors for good and in the summer of 1981 pre-production had even begun on making
love a major Studio film from 20th Century Fox about a married man coming to
terms with his homosexuality and the love triangle that develops between him his
wife and another man but in that same summer a rare cancer began appearing in
gay men followed by a cluster of pneumocystis pneumonia cases in San Francisco
and New York and then gay men across the world began dying and suddenly
Hollywood's opinion of us didn't matter so much