---
date: 2023-03-15
title: Hollywood's Golden Age (of Queer Coding)
parent: pW_RjbZYi1s
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "The Queer History of Hollywood (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
links: !!seq
notes:
  - hbomb

contributors:
  downloaded: $cite$TerraJRiley

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---

this video is brought to you by manscaped in Hollywood's early years
homosexuality found its way on screen in ways both secret and obvious to the
filmmakers behind the camera audiences rarely pushed back against these
depictions but those who did were loud if not Legion women's suffrage groups in
the Catholic Church were the most dedicated to removing gay and lesbian content
from Hollywood movies and with the institution of the motion picture production
code they more or less succeeded filmmakers could now be fined or blacklisted
for including gay and lesbian characters in their movies and some films such as
Dracula's daughter were heavily edited to remove any overt lesbian content but
go figure a bunch of people who came up in the industry through artistic Roots
knew how to manipulate literary devices in visual language to still include gay
themes and characters in their movies though in much less obvious ways along
with World War II and a coming end to what was referred to as the Golden Age of
Hollywood a time of gay invisibility had swept over the industry but it was an
invisibility that you could see through if you knew how to look but before we
explore the queer coding of the Aging days of the golden age of Hollywood first
a word from our sponsor this video is brought to you by manscape.com manscaped
has been known for years for their lawnmower hair trimmer that leaves men's
private bits Nick free but who wants to shave your face with the same razor that
you use to shave your balls that's nasty so now they're introducing the beard
hedger trimmer with a 7200 RPM Motor and titanium coated blades that can cut
through the thickest hair in a single stroke whether you prefer a five o'clock
shadow or a lion's mane you can choose from 20 different lengths with the zoom
wheel that uses only one guard to celebrate the launch of the beard hedger
manscape.com is launching the beard hedger Pro kit which includes the beard
hedger the your shampoo conditioner oil and Balm plus a travel case and multiple
free gifts to save 20 on the pro kit plus get free international shipping simply
go to manscape.com and use the promo code James S that's j-a-m-e-s-s or visit
the link in the description join the over 8 million men worldwide who trust
manscaped I was one of them even before they became a sponsor today foreign
[Music] [Music] foreign [Music] even though Hollywood didn't always tell the
truth this kept a lot of unwelcome facts and small problems from getting in the
way of the American dream even though gay and lesbian people were often the ones
who made these dreams come true they were never a part of it it is said that Sam
Goldwin founder of Goldwyn pictures which was one of the three Studios that
merged to create MGM once wanted to film The Well of Loneliness by Radcliffe
Hall but when a producer told him they couldn't because the main character was a
lesbian Goldwyn simply responded by saying so what we'll make her American
despite goldwyn's confusing lesbian for Lebanese the Americanization of
lesbianism did happen and meant nothing more than the simple refusal to deal
with it honestly it was an imitation of the American fear of sexuality in
general and the American duplicity regarding sexual deviance in particular in
all actuality it was the same invisibility that gays experienced in real life
only replicated in the movies despite this gays continued to make an appearance
as subtextual Phantoms that represented the fear of homosexuality itself they
served as his alien life forms that were yet firmly established as part of the
culture in every Walk of Life and they formed the shadowy counterpart to the
concept of the American dream sissies and tomboys were used as yardsticks for
what was deemed acceptable behavior in a culture that was so preoccupied with
the upkeep of sex norms and the celebration of everything masculine one
performer who happily ignored these sex Norms was Greta Garbo whose performance
as Queen Christina in the film of the same name released in 1934 was a challenge
to the standards of sexual and gender behavior that were considered acceptable
at the time it was the Collision on screen of her own androgynous aesthetic with
the reality of Christina's affinity for masculine clothes and activities that
gave the picture a realism that was uniquely its own Garbo who would Express her
desire to be in a film version of Oscar Wilde's The Picture of Dorian Gray with
herself in the title role in Marilyn Monroe as a young girl ruined by Dorian
created a particular dynamic in Queen Christina one that penetrated the queer
Erasure of the script her forlorn longings to escape her gloomy Destiny of
marriage and her skillful rejection of a series of male suitors are broken in
the first part of the film by her encounter with the Countess EBA Spar played by
a Elizabeth young their brief scene together is charged with sexuality and real
affection in that scene Garbo lifts the emotional barriers to characterize her
encounters with mail suitors Abba suggests brightly that they go for a sleigh
ride but Christina tells her sadly I can't know oh why not ambassadors treaties
councils how boring later when pressed by a Statesman to marry and produce an
heir to the throne Christina refuses but your majesty you cannot tie an Old Maid
I have no intention to Chancellor I shall die a bachelor her need to escape the
role assigned her by life was Christina's true driving passion Queen Christina
makes this abundantly clear she flees into the snow later in the film when she
discovers that ebispower has betrayed her love that is when she meets Antonio
the one man who seems to accept her and love her for all the things that so
horrify her court but he falls in love with her thinking at first that she's a
man and he seems quite willing to explore whatever this strange situation may
bring in the early days of Hollywood queen Christina stood out due to the fact
that it included a character that was unmistakably bisexual as well as many
instances of bisexuality in The Narrative of the film itself at the time the
lives of notable gay men and lesbians were either portrayed in a manner that was
drastically different from their actual experiences or were not addressed at all
in biographical films this straight watching of History has only marginally
changed in modern Cinema as seen by the fact that films such as Troy A Beautiful
Mind and the imitation game more or less ignore or completely erase the fact
that its primary characters are gay or bisexual it's one of the reasons why
audience members were taken aback by the lesbian relationships that were
depicted in the favorite even in the late 2010s audiences of historical biopics
anticipated that queerness would be erased from historical Recreations the
Betrayal of noted persons as heterosexual without regard for their true to life
sexuality has never been seen as a serious offense against a person's identity
until recently not even by the person whose life is falsified no it was better
to be straight even queer audiences themselves believe that especially in
Hollywood's golden age when it was a dirty secret most people yearned to be rid
of but there was an odd dichotomy developing in Hollywood whereas lesbian or
bisexual female characters could be redeemed in a film by being paired off with
the right man in the end bisexual or gay male characters had no such luxury in
the film Adam's Rib which was released in 1949 David Wayne plays the role of Kip
who is a yardstick par Excellence Kip serves as Katherine Hepburn's girlfriend
acting as a high-class Ethel Mertz to her feminist Lucy Ricardo despite
Catherine Hepburn's defense Spencer Tracy's apparent unease around him cannot be
denied as they were leaving the room following a heated discussion over feminism
Wayne said to Hepburn you've got me so convinced I may even go out and become a
woman when Wayne has gone Spencer Tracy mutters and he wouldn't have far to go
either Hepburn's Amanda can only shush him an indication that her feminism like
that of contemporary feminists who wanted their sons to grow up to be real men
goes only so far and breaks down at the thought of actually obscuring sex and
gender roles altogether yet the unyielding conviction in the masculine role
along with the hatred that this ideology bred was about to be shaken to its very
Foundation the buddy system that had been used during the second world war had
brought troops closer together than they had ever been before men who loved each
other's company but always selected women to display their manhood were forced
to confront their innate sexuality in the all-male atmosphere of military forces
this brought to the surface a misunderstanding regarding men's fundamental
sexuality the worry that these heterosexual relationships between men may in any
way be interpreted as being gay was a very genuine one and the movies made sure
that there was no indication of homosexuality involved in depictions of such
Partnerships there might have been less suspicion of homosexuality had the level
of paranoia surrounding its very mention not been so high in 1946 Richard
Brooks's novel The Brick Foxhole dealt with obsessive masculinity in the
military in it a gay decorator is murdered by a soldier he brings home to his
apartment for a drink the 1947 film adaptation Crossfire made the victim a
Jewish person and thus became an example of Hollywood's maturity in dealing with
anti-Semitism the New York Times noted the change in a review but said only that
the motivation for the murder had been changed to good Advantage The novel's
crucial discussion of men's striking out at what they fear in themselves was
omitted whenever all male circumstances were the topic of the movies whether
they were Cowboys sports or Soldiers the fantasy of the unfettered perennially
youthful man in pure and unsullied Brotherhood battled over the ever-present
societal taboo against male closeness director Clarence Brown toyed with this in
his film flesh and the devil in which John Gilbert and Lars Hansen play lifelong
friends who separate when one of them marries the woman they both love played by
Greta turbo by the end of the film Garbo has slept with both of them
precipitating a reluctant duel between the two men trying to stop them she falls
through some thin ice and drowns at this the men throw down their guns Embrace
and walk off into the sunset together their arms around each other their bond
rejoined following the intrusion of a woman Clarence Brown spoke of the
situation in an interview you can see my problem how to have these two Leading
Men wind up in each other's arms and not make them look like a couple of fairies
Joan Mellon in her study of masculinity in the movies Big Bad Wolves says that
the less violent men were in their film personas The more likely they were to be
interested in heterosexual love just the opposite has been true for
homoeroticism the perception of homosexual feelings as a brutal furtive
dangerous Force flourished in films about male bonding and violence playing off
of the idea of homosexuality being innately Criminal gentlemen in the movies
Jimmy Stewart and any movie about small town USA would never even subtextually
approach such relationships or feelings the concept of the gentleman who chooses
to love other men did not exist in American Film except in comedy in the films
of Laurel and Hardy their relationship was given a sweet and very real loving
Dimension a classic example of this one with unmistakably gay overtones is
1932's their first mistake Hardy's wife complains that he sees too much of
Laurel and not enough of her and the two friends discussed the situation but
what's the matter with her anyway no I don't know she says that I think more of
you than I do of her foreign but we won't go into that you know what the whole
trouble is what what you need is a baby in your house well what's that got to do
with it well if you've if you had a baby and it would keep your wife's mind
occupied and you could go out nights with me and she'd never think anything
about it so they go out and adopt a baby when they return home with it they
discovered that Hardy's wife is suing him for divorce for alienation of
affections having named Laurel as the other woman the remainder of the film is a
beautifully timed and performed domestic scene with Laurel and Hardy in bed with
the baby between them the obviousness of the coding has been lambasted ever
since the film's release with Charles Barr in his study of Laurel and Hardy
saying that there is something rather absurd about discussing this seriously at
all in the often infantile pre-sexual Nursery World in which Stan and Ollie
lived such Behavior would be natural I'd agree that it is in fact natural but
the idea of there ever having been a pre-sexual time is reaching but notice that
it is the naturalness of Laurel and Hardy's behavior that Barr and other critics
choose to defend not the sexuality and so it is indeed an attack on americanism
itself to suggest that homosexuality is present in the Laurel and Hearty
routines in pointing these things out one attacks the American illusion the
illusion that there is in fact such a thing as a real man and that to become one
is as easy as changing one's name from Marion Morrison to John Wayne the fact is
that comedy has been able to comment on sexual roles more readily than drama
could only because people may dismiss it as an impossible first neglected buddy
relationships exist even in classic cartoons while Disney may not have liked
hearing it but there are gay overtones in the relationships of more than one
pair of beloved animated figures from his classic years in 1940s Pinocchio
Honest John and Gideon a fox and a cat are best friends who procure Lost Boys
for sale to an evil Coachman who takes them to Pleasure Island they seduce
Pinocchio with the hit song High diddly D the second line of which is high
diddly day an actor's life is gay in Cinderella everyone's favorite mice jock
and Gus Gus volunteer to help finish Cinderella's dress in time for the ball but
they are quickly admonished by a female Mouse to leave the sowing to the women
their relationship grows throughout the film and later when Cinderella describes
how she was swept off her feet by the handsome prince Gus Gus puts an arm around
Jock's shoulder and holds him close and of course from the competition there was
Bugs Bunny giddy to throw on a dress and a wig at the first available
opportunity the real emotions in the movies at the time with exceptions for
films like Gone With the Wind always took place between men men had been the
important forces at work both as instigators of all the action and plots and as
instigators of the films themselves by deciding what movies should and should
not be made when screenwriter Gore Vidal discussed the script for the 1959
version of Ben Hur with director William Weiler they concluded that the Rivalry
between Judah Ben Hur Charlton Heston and his boyfriend Masala Stephen Boyd was
insufficiently motivated by a single political scene in which Ben Hur refuses to
Aid the Roman cause despite his friend's pleas Fidel described the problem I
proposed the notion that the two had been adolescent lovers and now Masala has
returned from Rome wanting to revive the love affair but Ben Hurd is not he has
read Leviticus and knows an Abomination when he sees one I told Weiler this is
what's going on underneath the scene they seem to be talking about politics but
Masala is really trying to rekindle A Love Affair and Weiler was startled we
discussed the matter and then he sighed well anything is better than what we've
got in the way of motivation but don't tell Chuck I did tell Stephen Boyd who
was fascinated he agreed to play the frustrated lover study his face in the
reaction shots in that scene and you will see that he plays it like a man
starving it was 1959 and filmmakers were on the verge of new creative freedoms
Vidal was saying that it made sense that the two men should be attracted to each
other theirs was the most vibrant and interesting relationship in the film
Weiler later told Vidal the biggest mistake we made was the straight love story
if we had cut out the girl all together and concentrated on the two guys
everything would have gone better director Howard Hawks always concentrated on
men in his films and in his films things went better than in Ben Hur at least in
1948's Red River hox's only use for Joe Andrew was to have her tell John Wayne
in Montgomery Clift what we can already see my bit expected trouble for days
when when anybody would have a mind would know you two love each other yet the
nature of that love despite Cliff's scene Persona doing for his character what
Garbo did for Queen Christina remained hidden despite one of the most re-watched
and arguably most homoerotic scenes in any film at the time being one in which
Montgomery Clift and John Ireland compare their pistols the only open
acknowledgment of the homosexuality and Buddy films came from those critics who
attributed the misogynist attitudes of such films to the covert gayness in them
when Joseph McBride and Gerald Perry in an interview in film comment questioned
Hawks about the gay undertones of his films Red River in particular Hawks told
them it was a goddamn silly statement to make it's easy to see how directors
might be oblivious to the subtexts that are present in their own work since
homosexuality is a viable alternative has been repressed both in the lives of
men and in their work on screen the taboo against male closeness is taken far
more seriously than it is in real life where it is more likely to be seen as a
neutral gay sensibility some people contend that there is no such thing as a gay
sensibility since the presence of such a thing would imply the existence of a
straight sensibility which is something that unquestionably does not exist yet a
gay sensibility can take on various forms and it is possible for it to be
present even when there is no indication of homosexuality either overt or covert
in front of or behind the camera the need to conceal one's sexual orientation
for such a significant portion of one's life is primarily responsible for the
development of a gay Sensibility it is a ghetto sensibility that was developed
out of the necessity to cultivate and employ a second site that would interpret
discreetly what the world sees and what the actual reality may be it was gay
sensibility that for example often enabled some lesbians and gay men to see at
very early ages even before they knew the words for what they were something on
the screen that they knew related to their lives in some way often it was the
simple recognition of difference the sudden understanding that something was
altered or not what it should be perhaps the role reversal of a Dietrich or
agarbo evoking a hidden truth about the nature of sexuality in general or it may
have been the tone in James Dean's voice as he zipped up the jacket of the Dead
cell Mineo in Rebel Without a Cause And muttered he's always called it was the
sense of Yearning that was there in these encounters the unsaid forbidden
desires that were always there but were always repressed even if the parts did
not fit together until years later it was a voice that could not be ignored with
no real homosexuals allowed on screen in the 40s and 50s sensors often began
looking for these hidden messages sometimes they found them even when there were
real things that were abundantly clear in the film rope for instance directed by
Alfred Hitchcock in 1948 Farley Granger and John Dahl play the role of two
pretentious gay lovers who on a whim murder a former Prep School classmate they
do this because they believe they possess a superior intellect and are not
morally responsible to a crass Society the sensor's attention was drawn not to
the exact relationship between the characters but rather to the discourse
between them Arthur Lawrence recalls that when he finished his screenplay for
rope he left England for America and while he was in America the script was
passed on by American censors rope came from an English play called rope's end
and while I was in New York the producer Sydney Bernstein took a few passages
from the play and put them back in the script so when it came back from the
Hayes office every one of those passages was circled with the common homosexual
dialogue written in the margin and do you know what they were it was simply that
they were saying things like my dear boy to each other and the way that the
English talked was known as fruity over here it's actually a long-held myth
within film circles that the reason Hitchcock filmed rope to appear as one long
unedited take was so that sensors would be unable to force him to cut any
perceived gay content without altering the artistic intent of the film there
were also other more covert homosexual relationships in Hitchcock films such as
the one between Martin Landau and James Mason and North by Northwest and more
strikingly the one between Robert Walker and Farley Granger in strangers on a
train nonetheless the filmmaker only seldom offered commentary on matters of
this nature regarding his work but Arthur Lawrence later said we never discussed
hitch and I whether the characters in rope were homosexuals but I thought it was
apparent I guess he did too but it never came up until we got to Casting we'd
wanted Cary Grant for the teacher in Montgomery Clift for one of the boys and
they both turned it down for the same reason their image they felt they couldn't
risk it eventually John Dahl and Farley Granger played the boys and they were
very aware of what they were doing he also stated that Robert Walker was the one
who suggested playing Bruno Anthony as a gay character in the film strangers on
a train the strangeness of their agreement was emphasized by the friction that
it caused between his malignantly Faye Bruno and Granger's golly gee tennis
player guy Haynes in compensation for the death of Bruno's despised father guy
agreed to take the life of Bruno's undesirable wife and put an end to guy's
marriage Bruno's homosexuality emerged in phrases that would be used
progressively during the 50s to describe gays as aliens because of his icy
demeanor his dark imagination and the elitist superiority that he exuded he was
an extension of the clever but lethal archetype Philip and Brandon the lovers in
rope were warped individuals who murdered out of a belief in their own moral and
intellectual superiority which they believed placed them outside the law by
existing outside the culture such gays were able to deny explicit homosexuality
while at the same time reinforcing specific stereotypes this is how Oscar
Wilde's The Picture of Dorian Gray could reach the screen in 1945 shorn of its
more bizarre sexual implications while offering George Saunders as a symbol of
sophisticated decadence such ghettoized characters pre-saged the gay as alien
images of the 1950s and had their roots in the same anti-intellectualism and
mistrust of difference that had characterized the shaping of Hollywood's image
of the normal American man the view of the homosexual as being alien to his own
Society was also present in the constant deletion of specific homosexuality from
the screen adaptations of literary Works in 1945 Billy Wilder brought Charles
Jackson's novel The Lost weekend to the screen with Ray Milland as the alcoholic
writer Don Burnham in Jackson's novel Burnham's alcoholism stems from a complex
variety of reasons that include a father fixation and a false accusation of his
having had a gay relationship with a college frat brother in Wilder's version of
the Lost weekend however the motivation for Burnham's drinking becomes a simple
case of writer's block the only frames of reference for the majority of gay
people were these covert signals and hidden indicators of homosexuality in
Hollywood movies the majority of gay people learned about themselves mostly
through movies that stated the rest of the world was straight a documentary
entitled word is out which was released in 1977 demonstrated that the majority
of gay people living in the United States had the misconception that they were
the only ones like them in the entire world several years later when the Supreme
Court finally ruled that it wasn't obscene to portray homosexual content on
screen films that were more overtly gay helped pave the way for the
legitimization of homosexual subject matter on screen nonetheless throughout the
early and middle part of the 1950s the invisibility of homosexuality was
enforced with an almost fanatical paranoia the perversity of the outsider the
Oddball or the alien screen character was very noticeable in an era built around
rigid Conformity such as the 1950s the equation between being different in any
way and being gay was easy to see in 1952's my son John Dean Jagger and Helen
Hayes played the distraught parents of a young man who is well not gay but a
communist agent played by Robert Walker when their suspicions about their son's
activities are confirmed it's an American Tragedy suddenly they see their son as
Shifty and unfamiliar a thing with no respect for God or country an unprincipled
monster to whom they can no longer relate the healthy family disappears Walker's
coldness his superiority and his open contempt for his parents and their way of
life conspire to create a perverse unnaturalness in a 1950 New York Times story
The Republican National committee chairman asserted that sexual perverts who
have infiltrated our government in recent years are perhaps as dangerous as
actual Communists by December of that year 4954 suspected homosexuals had been
removed from employment in the federal government the lavender scare was
gripping Washington and with the help of a future president would soon dig its
claws deep into Hollywood as well as we close out this episode I'd like to thank
our patrons for making this series possible YouTube isn't great when it comes to
pushing lgbtq content in fact in most cases they try their best to keep it
hidden so our amazing patrons are the reason that this channel keeps chugging
along if you'd like to become a patron and gain access to videos early as well
as patreon exclusive content like our podcast movie watch along parties and the
amazing community on our Discord you can sign up at the link in the description
for as little as a dollar a month all right now I'll let the credits roll and
I'll see you soon for unrequited episode three blacklisted [Music] thank you
[Music] foreign [Music] foreign [Music] foreign [Music] [Music]