---
date: 2022-06-14
title: The Queer Sensibilities of Cinema
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "How The Gays Stole Cinema"
  - "The Mainstreaming of Camp"
  - "The Beauty of Camp"
  - "Camp (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-videos-backup"
# description: "a video essay on...?"
notes:
  - multipart
  - behind-scenes

contributors:
  downloaded: $cite$TerraJRiley
  citation: 
    - "[/uGrand_Pineapple_4223](https://www.reddit.com/r/hbomberguy/comments/18a50c1/comment/kc2vdhh)"

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
{% assign tustin = site.data.cite.tustin2121 %}

<compare>
<credits class="desc">

PATREON: [link]

{% include chapter-link at="00:00" for="Introduction" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="04:42" for="All About Eve" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="10:48" for="Whatever Happened To Baby Jane?" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="25:28" for="Who's Afraid if Virginia Woolf?" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="37:52" for="Mommie Dearest" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="59:46" for="Intermission" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="01:00:39" for="Clue" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="01:07:02" for="Death Becomes Her" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="01:20:13" for="Elvira" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="01:26:17" for="Batman" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="01:38:47" for="Drag Queen Road Trips" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="01:46:36" for="But I'm a Cheerleader" %}  
{% include chapter-link at="01:52:56" for="Climax" %}  

#gay #lgbt #videoessay

</credits>
</compare>

{% include transcript-start %}

<compare>
<credits {% include timecode %}>

</credits>
<comment>
{% include header for=tustin %}

Note: This video is a compilation of two previous videos. Additionally, one section of part 1 was spun out into its own video after this compilation video was released.

In lieu of copy-pasting the previous transcripts, to facilitate not having multiple copies of things lying around, I will be linking out to these videos' transcripts. I will make note if anything has changed between the previous video and this one.

</comment>
</compare>

<compare>
<james meta fade=out {% include timecode %} id="ch1-in">

This video is brought to you by my patrons. If you'd like to support my channel and get access to extras like audio commentaries, a patron exclusive podcast and uncut videos, you can join by clicking the link in the description. 

</james>
<subvideo>

See Part 1 for the Cold Open

{%- assign subvid = site.videos | where: "slug", "Camp-000001" | first -%}
{% include video-card video=subvid anchor="parent-start" %}

</subvideo>
<james meta fade=in id="title-in">

tradespeople that helped turn Hollywood from a backwater orange grove in California to the city in which thousands of young dreamers make their way each year in hopes of becoming a star. It’s a long story. And like most classic American tales… it actually doesn’t begin in America at all. 

</james>
</compare>




<compare>
<credits {% include timecode %} class="opening">

\[Happy music, like something ripped from The Sims; tiny font]

> James Somerton presents

> Written by  
Nick Herrgott  
& James Somerton

> Executive Producers  
[21 patron names in two columns]

> Producers
[Patron names in columns: 19, 19, 19, and 14 names]

> Edited and Directed by  
James Somerton

> Whatever Happened  
To Good Taste?  
> How the gays used camp to steal Hollywood  
> and how the straights tried stealing it back  

</credits>
</compare>









# Transcript of "How The Gays Stole Cinema"


# Transcript of "The Mainstreaming of Camp"


# Transcript of the extra chapters
These include sections on:
- The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert
- To Wong, Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julia Newmar
- But I'm a Cheerleader




this video is brought to you by my patrons if you'd like to support my channel
and get access to extras like audio commentaries a patron exclusive podcast and
uncut videos you can join by clicking the link in the description i would like
if i may to take you on a strange journey did you know that there were queer
characters and not just villains in pre-haze code hollywood meaning the long
long ago hollywood for the uninitiated however there was only a brief window of
time between the end of the silent film era in 1929 and the institution of the
morally restrictive haze code in 1934 for them to exist in any real form but as
you'll know if you've watched any of my other videos filmmakers managed to sneak
in queerness despite the best efforts of the morally boring conservatives of the
time they just had to be sneaky about it they couldn't exactly show two men
kissing but they inserted their queer sensibilities into these productions
sensibilities that became lovingly known as camp oh i'm a man well nobody's
perfect the gays had always been drawn to the film industry and the divas who
fed it though you can't make a video talking about mommy dearest without
highlighting some of her more unflattering qualities joan crawford is indicative
of this as one of the only actresses to survive the transition from silent films
to what were referred to as the talkies get it because moving pictures or movies
and then they had it sound so they were talking pictures talkies joan crawford
probably became the archetype of the hollywood movie star and the gays loved her
for it because she exemplified this strong femininity she drew a massive fandom
of gay men which to her credit in an era when admitting gay people could even
exist would tank your career and even get you arrested joan openly supported the
queer people who supported her granted when it comes to gays flocking to women
who act as icons some things never change joan yes her rival betty davis judy
garland catherine hepburn mae west and well all the other old school hollywood
actresses you've actually heard of ask cher the gays can keep people around i
suppose in this era of mid-century queer discrimination civic mistrust and
institutional persecution we needed a way to propagate our culture unlike other
communities queer ones are non-hereditary we are not usually born into them
because even if gay people did manage to raise a child there was no guarantee
that the child would be queer itself so film was an easy way to propagate the
values of our community to future generations legends within the community often
suffered a tragically short lifespan even before the aids epidemic having joan
crawford epitomize poise and independence on the silver screen in spite of not
being a straight white man offered a method of cultural continuity for us
probably in a similar way that ancient cultures used figures of myth to
propagate a cultural identity to new generations of illiterate villagers but how
did gay people of the 20th century choose the myths that they did there were no
shortage of films out there of those films why did we gravitate towards such a
select few what was the criteria for holding these up as relics to pass down to
baby queers with lesbians there was a bit of a different process writers who
were usually men were so clueless about writing women that they often
accidentally wrote two friends being so close that it crossed into saffic
territory for which again enter joan crawford but if that logic applied to
straight men why are any number of westerns not held up by the gays because
these cowboys often got very close and vulnerable with each other instead we
gravitated toward a very specific iteration of femininity in very specific films
[Music] all about eve is a perfect place to start like i said not the first
queer icon movie but one of the first you may hear referenced a drag queen may
refer to someone as an eve harrington and you may not know what that means but
what they're doing is accusing someone of putting on a pleasant face while being
a backstabbing social climbing upstart who's using more established figures to
launch their own reputation kind of like a gold digger but instead of money they
seek fame and recognition and she chooses to latch on to marco channing played
by the betty davis margot is the queen of the new york theater scene and even in
her 40s is still the highest regarded stage actress in the city eve harrington
is a poor girl who attends every performance she can of margo's current show
karen richards margot's best friend and wife of the show's playwright spies eve
on one of these nights and invites her to meet margot in her dressing room eve
is introduced as an avid fan and captivates margot with stories of her past of
love heartbreak sorrow and pure unadulterated love for the theater margot brings
eve on as a kind of informal personal assistant something eve seems all too
eager to do waiting hand and foot on margot's whims and it's not hard for eve to
enchant almost everyone in margot's inner circle karen her husband lloyd and
margot is engaged to be engaged boyfriend and director bill sampson as far as
broadway goes this friend group is royalty what a coincidence that the young and
sweet and entirely unassuming eve harrington managed to elbow her way in the
only one who thinks that the numbers aren't adding up is margo's maid bertie
coonan who's there to be a good emotional support poor and call eve out for
being a fake [ __ ] and soon margot descends into a fit of assumed paranoia
regarding the young eve she nearly breaks up with bill she alienates lloyd who
specifically writes plays for her and threatens her entire career she's become
convinced that eve is trying to take her stardom away from her and though it
sounds paranoid she's entirely correct and eve's true motivations eventually
become clear when eve does an interview she says some particularly shady things
directed at margot and so while eve is playing her game of thrones karen begins
to mend some of the tension between margot and herself margot also finally
accepts bill's proposal and the grown-ups begin to get their [ __ ] together eve
does keep her talons gripped and karen's husband lloyd though who's one of the
most highly regarded playwrights in new york city she's after a starring role
that was written for margot which she feels will be her ticket to stardom all
she needs to do is find a way to push margot out of the role so as one does eve
blackmails karen to get her husband to steal the part away from margot and give
it to her and when the film ends eve harrington the darling pariah celebrates
her tony win for the part she stole from margot now exhausted in her condominium
she encounters a mild-mannered young lady who absolutely idolizes her who offers
to wait on eve hand and foot and eve too caught up to notice that history is
repeating itself right in front of her eyes accepts her offer all about eve is
considered one of the greatest films ever made it bags six academy awards out of
a total of 14 nominations a record it still holds to this day including best
picture director cinematography and screenplay it's also the only film in
history to get four women nominated for acting roles including one of davis's
most infamous oscar snubs for additional trivia this is also one of marilyn
monroe's first films a very small role granted but she makes an impact while
there are comedic elements to the film especially margot's biting shade this is
a very highly regarded dramatic film and yet we can see elements of this plot
being played out in modern farces that are so over the top that they can be
considered beyond camp hell you might see a plot line like this showing up on a
season of real housewives but that isn't to say that this model of story doesn't
turn heads in a good way even to this day 2010's black swan also more or less
followed the story of a young performer latching onto the success of an
established star to catapult her own career so it's not like the plot itself is
tainted but it does take a very steady hand to keep the format from descending
into a catfight and all about eve is definitely not the only diva fight story
out there especially if you want to swap actress for goddess there are any
number of greek plays and myths about goddesses destroying lives over petty
disagreements and are actresses not modern day goddesses worshipped at the altar
of the tabloid rack the gay appeal of all about eve is likely a combination of a
few things primarily the script written by joseph bankowitz who wrote enough
shade into the film to put oscar wilde to shame come to think of it the film
does share a number of very wildean elements on top of characters who spar with
wit there's a discourse on age and aging that leans toward an almost
vilification of youth and those who venerate youth but the film would be nothing
without george saunders anne baxter and of course betty davis to carry the
film's demand for sharp minds davis herself had a very substantial gay following
a staunch ally in her private life and at times even an outspoken one referring
to gays as her friends when confronting president ronald reagan about his
administration's inaction during the aids crisis davis herself was in no small
part responsible for helping screen acting depart from its origins of theatrical
acting whereas in the theater an actor would project their acting to the back of
the room actions were grand and bold and lions were delivered clearly and
methodically davis was more natural and for this reason whenever davis was in a
film it was like she was acting in an entirely different movie from everyone
else she was one of the first actors to really dive into presenting a character
with the kind of naturalism you couldn't really project on stage which nothing
exemplifies this more than acting opposite joan crawford in 1962's whatever
happened to baby jane probably one of the most foundational films of modern gay
culture [Music] parodies of this have been done over and over again to the point
where you hear the name and you hear the premise and you likely think it's this
exploitation comedic camp romp that may compare to a telenovela you'd be
partially right because it did kick off the hag exploitation trend that carried
crawford through her late career in hollywood high exploitation was a particular
subset of horror that was built on hollywood's disdain for older women where
women of a certain age are portrayed as horrifying monsters simply because of
their birthday but this genre in subversive fashion accidentally gave these
women some of the best roles of their later careers but as the progenitor of
high exploitation whatever happened to baby jane is so much more than the genre
it created it tells the story of baby jane hudson played again by betty davis
and blanche hudson played by the infamous joan crawford more on her later
formerly famous sisters living in their twilight years the film has two
sequences which we can see as prologues in the first we see baby jane at the
center of a stage performing a song and dance show for a riveted crowd her
father her manager and songwriter prefers to redirect attention from jane to
himself as indicated later on in the film where we see that all of the songs he
wrote for jane were about her daddy off stage blanche longs for her moment in
the spotlight in the second prologue the women are both making their way through
hollywood a producer remarks that jane hudson can't act to save her life but
they're stuck casting her see blanche is their golden starlet a talented actress
who can sell tickets like none other and she's got it in her contract that for
every film she does the studio must also cast jane in another we then see a
nighttime scene where presumably one of the hudson girls tries to murder the
other by crushing her between a car and the driveway gate the audience is led to
believe that it was a resentful jane who drove into blanche and left her
paraplegic and bedridden for the rest of her life the film itself follows the
progression of these sisters in their later life blanche's old films have gone
on to television and jane is none too pleased with her particular lot in life
taking care of her sister hand and foot every time blanche hits a blood-curdling
buzzer [Music] the plot revolves around jane learning that blanche is trying to
sell their house with no clear indication of what jane will do when presumably
left homeless as a severely alcoholic 60 year old she plans to take up her old
act again and tour with her old songs for income of her own and independence
from blanche it goes about as well as you would assume as blanche gets closer
and closer to selling the house jane begins to spiral deeper depicted almost as
a slasher serial killer tormenting a wheelchair-bound sister who can do nothing
to escape her situation jane is terrifying about halfway through the film jane's
portrayal begins to shift jane continuously expects people to know who she is
and is a little put off when people don't recognize her maybe you remember me
and baby jane sure at first this feeds into her portrayal as a monster this
arrogant fame obsessed petty woman who lords her control over blanche is the
only thing that makes her feel powerful we see jane and we think that she's out
of her mind that she's entirely convinced that it's possible to relive her
girlhood but as the film goes on we get the feeling that she is legitimately out
of her mind and what we saw as arrogance is now depicted as a delusional mental
state she does not want to merely rekindle her youth she seems entirely unaware
that it even ended having spent the entire film with her ghoulish white face and
heart-shaped beauty mark we see it later on smudged we the audience finally see
that this was not a directorial decision but a component of jane's character
every morning she has been putting on this white face of makeup and drawing on a
heart onto her cheek because she is locked in this state of existence and does
not seem able to escape this is after all the same makeup she would have worn
under the bright lights of a stage in fact she begins to regress acting younger
and younger but there's one problem that just won't let her be young oh shut up
just like jane there's a flip for blanche too early on we see jane's accusations
that blanche is out to stop jane from living her life and we agree with
blanche's denial of that because jane seems to be the villain and blanche by
contrast is sweet and patient with everyone she interacts with but more and more
we see blanche extending what control she has over jane the house after all is
in her name she controls the money she controls jane's drinking and in a very
nonchalant way does like to remind jane of that and blanche does in her own way
begin to admit that maybe jane's feelings of isolation at blanche's insistence
aren't completely unfounded what seems like a woman afraid for her life and
pleading with her captor can alternately be seen as a woman who's pulling out
all the stops to placate someone she's been manipulating for years see as jane
descends further and further into a childlike delusion she begins to lose sight
of the consequences of her actions as she torments blanche blanche begins to
remind jane of her dependence and her attempts to escape become bolder jane
responds in kind detaining her ripping the buzzer from the wall firing blanche's
maid tying blanche to her bed for days on end with no food and then murdering
the kind maid when she finds blanche tied up when jane is found out by the
pianist she hired for her planned upcoming career resurgence jane is thrown into
a full meltdown for reasons unknown she goes to blanche and desperately pulls
her into the car to go to the beach jane had reminisced about the beach that she
fondly remembers rehearsing there where people would circle around to watch her
dancing jane has a wonderful day running around barefoot playing catch with
other children and joyfully getting ice cream for her and her sister while
forgetting to pay all the while dehydrated malnourished and immobile blanche
cooks in the sun blanche does not have much time left and urges jane to hear a
final confession jane childishly holds her hands to her ears refusing to hear
what blanche has to say what she knows is true and what she had to reject for
the last 30 years to survive that it was blanche behind the wheel of the car
that night and that before the car hit jane she drunkenly stumbled out of the
way the accident left blanche crippled and she crawled out from behind the wheel
to make it seem like it was jane who had tried to kill her and then we see the
film in a different light this was not about a jealous sister who resented the
others fame and success to the point of committing torture this was about a
woman who had been gaslit so severely that her entire psyche had collapsed jane
was robbed of her childhood by her father and robbed of her womanhood by her
sister all the while everyone told her that she was the monster behind
everything and so she turned herself into that monster retroactively we learned
that jane's feelings and paranoias were valid all along and that blanche never
really quit acting after all acting the part of the victim blanche had spent 30
years exploiting a fabricated guilt complex to make a loyal servant out of jane
and as soon as she had a more pliable willing servant she was all too ready to
completely discard her sister jane though a monster nevertheless was a monster
that blanche had created not entirely unlike us queer folk who are gaslit into
believing we're the broken ones in a society too broken to accept us whose
parents abandon us leaving us feeling unloved and unknown but on the california
beach where jane sits beside blanche and remarks to her abuser all this time we
could have been friends and then the audience is left with this visceral
discomfort for the next few hours now like with all about eve it's clear to see
why it would appeal to fem heavy queer circles it's got all the kind of meaty
feminine things the drag queens love outrageous personalities women using
duplicity as a weapon old icons clinging on to past glory pathos in excess which
isn't a half bad definition of camp actually pathos in excess finding gravitas
in the mundane making an aristocracy out of the destitute isolating this house
from the rest of the world all the politics of culture art and society matter
less than the ability to navigate the politics of this enclosure because the
fact of the matter is that both of these women are suffering due to their father
despite having a relatively small role in the film itself he left both girls
with emotional scars that would heavily influence their downfall because while
he did manage jane's career and her youth he also facilitated blanche's career
in hollywood and while he bought the house the girls live in there is some
question as to whether he bought it with the money he made off of jane or off a
blanch make no mistake he did make the money off of his girls and something that
is true to queer circles it is so tempting to climb to the top of the heap at
the bottom of the barrel even if it means stepping on other people below you to
do it but aside from plot and themes the film's primary draw was being able to
finally watch joan crawford and betty davis act against each other fans flocked
to it like it was the boxing match of the century the drama around this film
hovered like a miasma when in reality the rivalry between crawford and davis was
played up even at the time before baby jane their feud amounted to basically
fighting for the same roles for the past 10 years that was it and when it comes
to the making of drama yes there was a lot in fact as per the camp definition of
making much ado about nothing the behind-the-scenes antics rivaled what you'd
watch in a movie ranging from all manner of petty things the women did to piss
each other off the studio seeing the dailies come in seemed to encourage this
animosity among their actresses producers were worried that if crawford and
davis buried the hatchet during filming that their characters loathing of each
other wouldn't be as palpable so like in the film two women were pitted against
each other by men so that men could profit off of them but to me the most
interesting thing about the making of the film is that yes joan crawford really
did pitch this idea to warner brothers and essentially single-handedly pulled
this project together maybe foolishly she didn't go after a producer credit and
honestly if this was the kind of quality she could assemble she could have been
a trailblazer for women on the production end of hollywood instead crawford was
obsessed with being a movie star specifically she wanted another oscar or at
least a nomination and she really thought that she could act the straight
character opposite the woman losing her mind and get an oscar nomination for
being in a wheelchair for half the movie she really thought that that was going
to be enough and no disrespect she did have an oscar by then however as a
typified movie star joan crawford really only ever played joan crawford in
whatever movie she was in that's what movie stars are for they're cast because
their personal brand will fit in a given movie and that's not to say that movie
stars aren't as good or valuable as character actors would you rather be julia
roberts or tilda swinton it's not a contest it's just a different game that said
davis did have a habit of elevating actors she was in the same room as in
instances like all about eve you can see the cast beginning to adopt more of
davis's signature style as the film goes on and become much more natural perhaps
to the benefit of whatever happened to baby jane joan crawford wasn't a good
enough actress to act through her natural narcissism crawford making sure that
she was picture perfect for each shot that the camera caught all her good angles
her emphasis on beauty in spite of being a shut-in who hadn't seen the sun for
20 years all of that added an extra layer of fraudulence to the character jones
natural demeanor bled through and added to blanche's fraudulent duplicity this
is the value of a movie star without intending to and perhaps without realizing
it joan elevated an otherwise benign role and it's because of all these nuances
and subtleties that hag exploitation became such a hit genre in the 60s there
was a clamor to cash in on the trope whatever happened to baby jane with a
budget of just under 1 million dollars grossed 10 million dollars at the box
office which even by today's standards would be considered an indie success but
in the 1960s this was a cash cow however as a progenitor it employed a massive
amount of talent in front of and behind the camera filmmakers who wanted to
innovate to bring out the thematic elements of the story it's often the curse of
repetition that people will say i want to do that thing without realizing what
it was that made that thing so impactful there's a reason halloween spearheaded
the slasher movie and was never superseded by the man with a knife copycats had
exploitation was constructed around old women being shady and even crazy though
whatever happened to baby jane was a character study on the cognitive dissonance
of long-term gaslighting the complex relationships of sisters and constructing a
narrative where truth and illusion are difficult to discern it all takes a very
steady hand to pull that off without dipping into farce because you can get all
the cheap thrills you need just by having women being naughty there does need to
be that element of pathos to really give something legs though because it is in
the pathos that we the audience can see ourselves reflected in while there are
few of us who are blanche and or jane hudson's we can see the elements of their
relationship and apply it to our own lives and that's what happened to baby jane
of course it seems to be a pattern that we're inherently drawn to films which
depict established icons serving up something new old dogs learning new tricks
only adds to their legend and from here we turn from betty davis and joan
crawford and look toward another gay icon elizabeth taylor i'm sure you've heard
of her what a dump [Music] the same year that whatever happened to baby jane
premiered the world of theater was shooketh by the premiere of who's afraid of
virginia woolf which went on to win tony's for best play and in the acting
categories he was also selected to win a pulitzer prize though the committee
struck down that decision as the play had too much profanity the same year who's
afraid of virginia woolf was first staged the film cleopatra also hit theaters
another entry in elizabeth taylor's ubra though unfortunately cleopatra was a
disaster we remember it now as this kind of iconic symbol of hollywood opulence
taylor's personal wardrobe budget was nearly two hundred thousand dollars in
1960. that's about two million dollars today taylor herself was offered the part
after a very lengthy casting process and only reluctantly agreed to do it she
highballed the studio for a contract she thought fox would never go for and
broke a record for being the first actress to be paid one million dollars for a
single hollywood movie there's conflicting accounts but she may have been the
first actor period to get a million dollar salary for a movie alternately it may
have been marlon brando for mutiny on the bounty but you know he sucked a dick
or two so he's part of the club the film took nearly 10 years to finish and was
initially pitched as a modest 2 million historical fiction however production
was launched during the peak of hollywood spectacle so the studio's take on it
was that this was a fabulous time to go big or go home that two million dollars
quickly got inflated to 31 million dollars anyway artistic sensibilities shifted
in the 1960s audiences turned away from raw spectacle and instead preferred more
personal stories like the graduate easy rider bonnie and clyde and whatever
happened to baby jane cleopatra's budget was so inflated and audiences were so
disinterested in spectacle that it nearly tanked 20th century fox they were only
saved by the rocky horror picture show more camp look it up it's true and
getting to the point the movie was at the time said to be the end of elizabeth
taylor's career fast forward to a few short years later when a screen adaptation
of who's afraid of virginia woolf was announced and taylor was due to play the
lead critics immediately scoffed they felt the taylor's movie star brand clashed
with the content of the play and the tailor herself was too young to
convincingly play a middle-aged woman but no taylor really did get on set and
eat that chicken wing on camera she relentlessly committed to martha it was
uncanny it's worth noting that actors even in films today do not normally eat on
camera there's usually a cut before or after giving an actor a chance to spit
out what's in their mouth or pretend to chew while holding a sandwich with a
bite taken out of it a problem you know arises if you need to do 10 takes of an
actor eating pizza what happened to you do i look fat liz i had to eat four
slices of pizza on stage at each performance jenna that's 32 pieces of pizza a
week no that can't be right the story follows george and martha which you may
hear a gay describe a given couple as a regular george and martha not a
flattering remark george is an associate professor and despite his clear
intellect and how long he's taught at the university and the fact that martha is
the daughter of the university president he is locked in this lowly position for
reasons not yet known upon returning home from a faculty function late at night
martha tells george tired and half drunk that she's invited a young couple over
to have a drink george reluctantly agrees even before the couple arrives george
and martha do nothing but needle each other to the point of verbal emotional and
physical abuse it's not particularly clear who is abusing who though it does
seem that martha is the instigator when the couple arrives nick a young
professor of biology and his wife honey george and martha don't stop needling
each other but they begin to be more subtle about it they verbally express their
enjoyment of playing games but it's not clear what those games are as george and
martha load up the guests with drinks their polite masks begin to crack with a
full argument breaking out when martha mentions their 16 year old son tahani
again for reasons unknown nick admits to george that he intends to sleep his way
up the university ladder saying that he wouldn't mind starting with martha to
george's face which george just kind of takes in stride which somehow makes this
scene even more homoerotic than it already was as the group gets drunker and
looser nick gets flirtier with everybody but his wife as part of their game
martha reveals that the reason george can't get a promotion is because he
admitted to the university president that he spent years in a mental institution
for accidentally killing his parents and that he would have been blacklisted
from all of academia if it wasn't for martha's insistence for which george
attacks her after a fatalistic argument with george martha takes nick and they
have wild drunken sex for which it's implied that nick actually had a tough time
keeping it up once again leading to some speculation about who nick had actually
intended to sleep with to climb that ladder and as a coup de grace in the game
george kills his and martha's own child twitch the audience and the house guests
are confused see what happened is that the child never existed george and martha
could not conceive for unclear reasons and george permitted martha to make a
fantasy child however due to george's shaky reputation a rule of this game was
that nobody could ever know about this imaginary child a rule martha broke when
in her drunken enthusiasm she told honey about him thereby giving george
permission as per the rules of the game to kill him in a car accident straight
people and people think wanda has a weird situation with her kids the young
couple heads home now realizing what a tangled mess they've gotten themselves
into by choosing an exciting career in academia a field where people have too
much intellectual energy without enough to actually do and george and martha
resolve to stay together because they don't have anything else but each other
but like all about eve and whatever happened to baby jane there is more to this
than betty davis joan crawford and elizabeth taylor dragging their gay fans into
movie seats to watch this film at gunpoint about damaged heterosexuals on top of
the fact that this is two hours of shade and a fabulous older woman getting a
studly young man in the sack there's some back brain gay appeal here who's
afraid of virginia woolf primarily takes on a critique of social values namely
the performativity of social expectations both george and martha are so
disillusioned with their lives that they prefer to develop actual illusions to
exist in to the extent where they themselves are unaware of where the lines are
drawn there's also a whole lot to say about who may hold the real power in this
relationship to the outside it's a wonder why they even chose to be together
nick certainly doesn't seem to understand it at first and questions why martha
even chooses to keep protecting george's career with that bargaining chip it
would seem she carries the ultimatum to him she clearly hates george and would
do fine with another man but that's where he's wrong george who is out somewhere
there in the dark who is good to me whom i revile who can keep learning the
games we play as quickly as i can change them who can make me happy and i do not
wish to be happy martha may serve as a protection for george's career but george
as someone who understands the need to escape a traumatic reality may be the
only person who would allow martha's illusions to flourish they have this
tumultuous codependency that they both hate and yet that they both need to
function power dynamics for them are like a game of hungry hungry hippos with
infinite marbles they're both in it to win it even if winning's impossible even
if the trophy is a few seconds of emotional superiority it's worth getting
dragged through the mud and so because their lives are too mundane for their
taste they develop this mutually accepted environment of games what their games
seem to be as i said are a temporary emotional victory but also something deeper
martha is a powerful woman and given the social climate of the 1960s she may be
betting correctly when she says she won't be able to find another relationship
where she can have the kind of control that she does but she also doesn't want
some simp that'll just bend over for her she wants an equal footing of power and
a romantic dynamic and we do see her when she is affectionate with george at
least in taylor's performance but taylor's take on martha is that this is a
woman who easily becomes bored with a clearly defined power dynamic she would
rather have her toxic battle with george than take the risk of looking for
something else that would be more healthy the gay appeal here is that whatever
happened to virginia woolf who's afraid of baby jane there's something about eve
baby um gays are drawn to the eternal struggle of george and martha because it
typifies a lot of the straight experiences that we've seen it raises the
question without answering it are the straights okay because we see them in
these relationships these marriages these arrangements we see them fight and
scuffle and rush into things and we see them go through it all because i mean
it's not really clear if you hate doing something why do you do it we see this
weird muscle memory that straight people have around milestones what your life
should look like by a certain age what age you have to be to get married to buy
your first house to have kids there's no clear rule book that says this and yet
to this day there are psychological expectations which depending upon region
have specific dates and the straights all know them it's like gays knowing the
lyrics to lady gaga shaiza nobody asked them nobody said they had to know these
things and yet somehow they all do yet we tell ourselves that we are free george
and martha represent what we fear the heterosexual urge to twist your own arm to
be able to fit a nuclear family ideal to make concessions of yourself and your
own identity for the sake of fitting this appearance and meanwhile telling
everyone around you that this is just how it's meant to be inventing toxic games
to torment your spouse constantly pushing boundaries redefining what the
boundaries are and making up fake rules as red herrings all to fill that
intellectual need to feel powerful and you take it out on your spouse because
what are they going to do break the codependency completely destroy the both of
you marriage offers no recourse your bank accounts are together you're afraid of
changing because you built your life around this other person you're stuck
that's where you live that's where you exist there's way too much emotional
baggage wrapped up in the other to just leave so why not flex the power you can
and see what broken boundary is just too far what is divorce if not the safe
word for suburban families when it comes to george and martha there's no way to
win the game but if playing the game is pushing the other one to their limit and
either forcing them to redefine their limit or give up then giving up is losing
and like the previous films discussed it's very clear to see how a story like
this could translate into an almost slapstick first as i said about steady hands
there was an incredible amount of talent in this production and there is a
reason why out of the library of gay camp which is held up on a pedestal these
older entries approach their subject matter with much more seriousness than you
would get out of a john waters movie though this list is not comprehensive these
belong to a group of progenitors which present these themes as realities when
these movies do well and resonate with audiences there are going to be a horde
of people who want to recreate these themes and emotions and many of these
imitation films were forgotten many simply couldn't go as hard they were
unremarkable or interchangeable and thus forgettable but some took the nuance
and decided that if they couldn't match elizabeth taylor then they would exceed
her and thus the gays redefined what has now become known as camp and camp in
turn redefined us [Music] now we're getting into it susan sontag in her essay
notes on camp often cited as the quintessential document on camp culture remarks
an association between gays and camp and as she was writing in the 1960s she was
highlighting a very retroactive depiction from her upbringing baby jane had only
just come out when this paper was published this indicates that gay attraction
to overwrought and badly depicted feminine archetypes was well solidified long
before 1981 when the infamous mommy dearest premiered the purported true story
of growing up with movie star joan crawford as a mother through the process of
imitation baby jane cleopatra martha eve harrington and crawford herself are
imitated here to the point where in faye dunaway's mind playing joan crawford
this is a perfectly nuanced depiction of hollywood's archetypal movie star john
waters described mommy dearest as the first drag queen role played by a woman
and he's not wrong but it seems to be completely by accident films that are
accidental camp are kind of rare without clear intent failed camp either goes so
big that it looks cheap and we disconnect or they don't go big enough either way
we don't make a point of remembering those movies so when one does manage to hit
the right buttons we hold onto it for dear life so enter mommy dearest first
published as a book by christina crawford in 1978 describing her torturous
relationship with her mother joan one year after jones death in 1977 the story
is about a daughter who is struggling to reconcile her love for an abusive
parent which would have made a great movie in no time at all studios snatched up
the rights to the story and christina herself wrote a script when faye dunaway
was cast in the lead role riding on her oscar from 1977's network the studio and
faye herself wanted to restructure the script to center around crawford with
faye's husband who she managed to make a producer on the film trying to sanitize
joan and christina's husband being accused of trying to turn joan into a monster
so what joan did we get the film opens with dunaway's crawford hollywood queen
musing about how despite her success in global allure she feels like there's
just something missing from her life yes her career is in a bit of a slump but
she isn't as concerned about that because she thinks that just means that now is
a great time to become a mother unable to bear children she begins to suggest
the option of adoption to her then boyfriend and hollywood lawyer greg savitt
who helps her pull the strings she needs to pull to have an adoption agency hand
her a baby this scene is played entirely straight by the way this visual pulls
crawford to the center of attention like a reifenstahl-esque monarch or idol
once again unnecessary pathos and all this unnecessary pathos feeds into this
lofty visual language of jones perfection channeled through dunaway we're only
five minutes in and no it does not slow down from here the first act of the film
explores the strange power dynamic between joan and her young daughter christina
this is where most of the iconic scenes of the movie come from because this is
where joan is depicted at her most unhinged now how can one of the most powerful
actresses in hollywood's history have a struggle for power with a child well
that's something that critics slam the script for there isn't really any textual
reason for why joan is such a terror to her family there's no reason why joan is
triggered at the sight of a wire hanger or why christopher has to wear a harness
to bed which feeds into the insanity of this role there are all of these
compulsions but no exploration as to why the surface level of the analysis is
out to seemingly use joan to subvert the expectations of a hollywood star
someone for whom the public lawed as the ideal of perfection and womanhood
though in reality is a monster in her private life when cameras are on she's
joan crawford when they're off she's a woman who is desperately trying to keep
everyone in line so that she can be joan crawford already the gays are on board
for that we love expose on fakeness feels like gossip with substance guilt-free
relating to our personal lives a lot of queer people in the community come from
families that an outsider would say are ideal but for those of us who have to
live with our parents homophobic attitudes that perfection is a little different
behind closed doors parents often let nasty things slip when they're away from
polite company and that's doubly complicated because it means nobody believes
you especially nowadays when bigotry isn't quite so in vogue parents still do
and say homophobic and transphobic [ __ ] but they do get a little gas lady
about it dare i say shady i've even heard of situations especially from trans
people where their own therapists will try convincing them that they're making
up their parents transphobia however just because there's no surface reading
doesn't mean that explanations aren't inferred which is mostly on faye dunaway
for sucking up every drop of attention away from any deeper analysis look a
little deeper into joan's parenting in christina's early life and especially
joan's biographical context and you guessed it there's a commentary about youth
and beauty in multiple instances in mommy dearest whenever it seems that
christina is coming of age as a lady jones sees that as competition from living
out a fantasy and the spotlight to taking a few tricks from joan's own book on
how to flirt with men christina is a threat to jones reign christina is both a
rival a symbol of her fading youth a child a miniature version of joan within
whom she can place all her expectations and an opportunity to exercise her
authority christina must be better than joan but also joan must use christina to
prove that she's still at the top of her game she both pushes christina beyond
what is reasonable to expect of a little girl and also smugly revels in
christina's failures often resorting to humiliating christina as a punishment
for either not being perfect or for seemingly encroaching on jones reign what
are you doing don't you tell me what i'm doing don't tell me mommy yeah i know
you look awful you'll be quiet you're always rummaging through my drawers trying
to find a way to make people look at you while you're always looking at yourself
in the mirror why are you doing that tell me joan is so fixated on perfection
that she can't handle it when things don't quite fall into place following
several poor performing films mgm releases joan from her contract this compiles
with a string of failed romances and triggers a cascade of joan's greatest fears
her beauty something she felt was her primary asset is fading but what terrifies
her is that she does not have the talent to make up for it in her defense yes
mgm was shafting her as a human being she was aging but they continued to caster
her roles as if she was the joan crawford that she was 15 years prior instead of
i don't know letting her play more mature roles they just cut her loose because
she wasn't ageless joan crawford it is implied held herself up to perfection
because she accurately assumed that a single slip up would have her thrown to
the dogs and when that fear was validated we can expect some erratic behavior
which gives us one of the most iconic scenes in camp history so hollywood is an
absurd place it's why movies about hollywood generally don't click with general
audiences because it's a place like no other so you're already in absurd
territory but instead of mitigating the absurdity and explaining the kind of
anxieties and pressure that exist in this place there's joan down on the ground
hacking away at roses in a gorgeous beaded gown and that line delivery tina
bring me the axe where each word is punctuated with an entirely distinct and
separate emotion it's a complete sensory overload and honestly though the quote
gets thrown around fans of the scene are missing two of the best parts first the
fact that they actually committed to a wide shot of fey hacking away at that
orange tree in that gown second joan says bring me the axe the axe the axe not
bring me an axe bring me the axe in the literal syntactic text of the movie we
can gauge that this is a regular occurrence at the crawford household because
christina didn't flinch and she knew exactly which axe to get and where to get
it i feel as if the movie had done even the slightest amount of work to bring
out the aforementioned subtext you could pull off this exact scene as a
harrowing self-destruction of joan's psyche reading into it joan feels her
perfect garden must match her internalized feeling of inadequacy if mgm tells
her that she's not perfect then there's no point in having anything perfect
around why should something be more perfect than her if being perfect was her
only value it could be a really gripping scene the problem is that without
adequate build up or actual exploration of joan's emotions instead with dunaway
opting to depict these emotions as mood swings this scene comes out of nowhere
it's also worth mentioning that this film doesn't really follow a narrative we
go from jones celebrating her long-awaited oscar win and the winner is john
crawford directly into no wire hi guys ever which again could be a legitimately
terrifying scene if there was any kind of narrative consequentialism that said
when it comes to abusive households there's usually this soft reset button at
the end of the episode where there's an unspoken agreement to leave it in the
past at least when it involves younger children which in and of itself is a
really eerie and unsettling concept though mommy dearest does absolutely nothing
to establish this precedence with spoken or visual language and no the abuse
does not end with jones shipping christina off to boarding school which it is
implied joan was doing because she observed her daughter beginning to experiment
with flirting not on her watch when christina is caught kissing a boy at the
school she's reprimanded by the administration but joan insists that she be
expelled for some reason and instead pulls christina out of the school now as it
turned out beyond just kissing boys christina ended up quite enjoying her time
away from her mother at the boarding school and given that the discipline
obsessed joan originally intended private school to be a punishment enjoying a
punishment is also something that will not happen on her watch leading to
another iconic scene joan barba please please barbara bringing christina home as
she has an interview schedule joan coyly if not proudly remarks that christina
was expelled after telling christina not to talk about the expulsion i can't
think of a single parent who would gloat about their child's expulsion but to
joan it's almost like a victory a failure for a rival is a victory for her
christina points out to the reporter that she was not in fact expelled twitch
joan throws a fit over being accused of lying even though she was lying why do
you deliberately defy me why did you tell her i got expelled because you did get
expelled that is a lie when christina calls her out joan just goes right on and
slaps her in front of the reporter and then blames her for making her embarrass
herself in front of the reporter you you deliberately embarrass me in front of a
reporter joan begins to spiral aimlessly with such and such parental insults
about gratitude but it seems like christina's done with this song and dance and
asks why joan bothered to adopt her if joan didn't seem to want anything to do
with christina why did you adopt me maybe i did it for a little extra publicity
tensions rise and why can't you treat me i would be treated by any stranger on
the street because i am not one of your fans and now we're getting into the
territory of christina's accounts that can be backed up by fact fact number one
is that yes joan really did replace christina on a soap opera that christina was
cast in joan in her 60s takes the role of a 28 year old woman while christina is
recovering from a benign ovarian tumor fact number two is another iconic scene
joan crawford was on the board of directors for pepsico via her husband the
company was a nothing upstart to compete with the behemoth that was coca-cola
joan was brought on as a brand ambassador and basically made the company into
what it was joan married the ceo and the board of directors did try to force her
out after his death in the film this encounter is depicted with jones screaming
into the boardroom famously saying dude with me fellas and though this is a
famous line from the film it's not the line that was lifted from the secretary's
notes at the meeting but joan did say to the directors i fought worse monsters
than you for years in hollywood i know how to win the hard way ironically this
is one of dunaway's more understated lines in the entire film this meeting in
reality was much more cordial than dunaway delivered why did it need to get
turned up to an 11 why not that's why rounding off the film is the reading of
joan crawford's will with christina and christopher when it comes to what joan
left them joan writes that they will receive nothing reasons which are well
known to them which was the literal reading of the will that happened that's the
last thing christopher and christina ever heard from their mother and when asked
apparently neither of them know what those reasons were there are some
suggestions that joan wrote them out of the will because she heard christina was
already writing mommy dearest while joan was alive but that doesn't explain why
she nicks christopher the film doesn't even mention jones younger two children
who she adopted just about the same time that christina went off to boarding
school funny timing that now as with all great camp movies half of the fun is
the gossip and the making of mommy dearest is no exception as mentioned mommy
dearest was a celebrity expose christina's account is a pain-tormented struggle
between loving her mother and recalling good memories of joan but also living
through some very traumatic abuse and behavior though the way hollywood figures
talk about it especially those who are close to joan even betty davis herself
christina makes joan out to be a demon that she wasn't who's one of the worst
people you know in hollywood that i worked with or that you wouldn't want to
work with again if you don't you don't have one one million dollars fade down
away but the book is much tamer especially if your frame of reference is the
movie and honestly a lot of the vitriol that gets slung at christina is well i
never saw joan beat her children i never saw this happen well i never saw harvey
weinstein rape anybody which you'd think in this post me too believe victim
society that excuse wouldn't fly but christina to this day has haters i think
christine was very very envious of joan crawford and her public and her
popularity and her beauty hollywood is said to be a small town and the vitriol
directed at christina may simply be them protecting one of their own christina
does make a point of specifically blaming hollywood for crafting jones
narcissism before the fall of the studio system the studios themselves would
mold their stars into fitting specific personality ideals to put on airs not
only for cameras but for fans in private it was rare that you'd get a star like
davis or katherine hepburn who didn't bother with the facade this is apparent in
a documentary called bright lights starring carrie fisher and debbie reynolds
may they rest in peace reynolds while being interviewed still had her signature
debbie reynolds charm however the documentary crew kept the cameras rolling when
carrie took her aside from around the corner debbie's voice is much weaker and
more vulnerable even though she was a woman in her 80s debbie reynolds was a
mask she had to wear for the public luckily she did have a supportive family
with whom she didn't have to wear it christina's take seems to be that jones
simply wasn't able to take that mask off at all and resorted to drastic behavior
when the porcelain started to crack but with all the hatred toward the story and
toward christina it does boggle my mind that hollywood was so horny to get this
movie made as soon as the book came out you couldn't find anyone who had
anything good to say about it faye dunaway herself agreed to play the role as
long as it was more respectful to jones memory than the book though christina's
book was obviously an exploitation book the first one of its kind my task was to
portray a woman a full woman who she was in all her facets not just one i tried
to illuminate who this woman was but it was more than just about being angry it
was about trying to examine and explore the forces that undermined her i don't
think faye and i watched the same movie christina actually did not feel that
dunaway's performance accurately depicted her mother specifically claiming that
dunaway's depiction of joan was far more monstrous than she ever experienced is
that anywhere near the way joan crawford actually acted only the makeup faye
dunaway specifically went out of her way to manipulate the script the director
and producers to humanize joan all the while lambasting the book as tabloid
drivel only for the author of that drivel to decry the performance for depicting
a monster it also didn't help that dunaway was already kind of a diva once again
ironically joan crawford was quoted saying of all the actresses to me only faye
dunaway has the talent and the class and the courage it takes to make a real
star dunaway later blamed mommy dearest for hurting her career and given that
she was a bit of a hot ticket actress before the 80s she was forced into roles
in smaller films for the rest of her life and on one hand you may say it's
because of her performance but plenty of actors have had bad roles maybe nothing
so monumental is this but fey was a bit of a hassle you see on top of being a
prima donna in general she allegedly terrorized the set of mommy dearest for
starters she refused to drop out of character during production so on top of
delivering that on camera the crew and cast had to live with that for weeks
routania alda who played jones assistant in the film wrote a behind-the-scenes
memoir about the filming experience she wrote people despised faye because she
was rude to people everyone was on pins and needles when she worked and relaxed
when she didn't to name a few things faye allegedly manipulated the director to
rob other actors of their screen time to pull it to herself she also insisted
that people on set needed to turn away from her while she was performing because
she didn't want an audience regarding her method acting and will avoid a
discussion about what method acting really is and how a lot of actors misuse the
term dunaway had the usual nonsense to say but with an extra twist if your mind
is on a woman who is dead and you're trying to find out who she was and do right
by her you do feel a presence i felt it at home at night sometimes it wasn't
pleasant i felt joan was not at rest so i think what happened is that faye was
so engaged with the memory of joan that she may have spurred a vindictive streak
against christina and so she kind of took out all that bottled up rage on the
effigy of christina which is why you got all this aggression i think well there
was an initial wave of critics who hailed her performance it didn't take long
for the public perception to swing the other way going down as one of the best
bad performances of all time a serious actress like faye dunaway did not cotton
to that idea she blamed the director for not reeling her back she blamed the
editors and the producers for taking her depiction of a window into a tormented
soul and making it camp she blamed christina and her husband she blamed
christina's book and worst of all she blamed her audience for not taking away
her intended interpretation though she has come around to the unforeseen fandom
of the film but still doesn't quite get what they see in it because make no
mistake there is a fandom around this moving picture little did dunaway know she
had opened the floodgates to a whole fandom that had only until then existed in
burlesque shows a fandom that upon the movie's release would hang christina
crawford in effigy mommy dearest legitimized a whole group of audiences and
creators who were going to do what dunaway did but do it on purpose with or
without the ghost of joan crawford believe it or not studio heads rarely know
what they're doing which is how you can have money catapulted at projects like
cleopatra or mommy dearest and especially in the case of the latter all that
ends up doing is giving an inflated budget to the kind of overwrought and
overacted content that you would get in what is considered b cinema and
especially if that high budget b movie pulls in an audience creators who love be
cinema are going to feel very validated like quentin tarantino growing up on
martial arts movies and then getting to make one of his own with a hollywood
budget and kill bill could also be described as camp for any number of reasons
but when it specifically came to feminine-centric burlesque aesthetic the 1980s
opened a lot of doors to have producers approve movies with more obvious camp
sensibilities nothing about a movie that was exclusively made to ape off of the
success of a board game implies that said movie would end up becoming a camp
milestone but here we are in 1985 paramount pictures distributed clue the movie
which yes is directly inspired by the board game and they didn't really seem to
care what it was as long as there was a movie based on it the qualifications for
meeting the outline parameters were incredibly vague which could have gone one
of two ways either you get a movie that follows the path of least resistance and
you end up with a product that is phenomenally lackluster and lifeless or you
hand it to a bunch of enthusiastic creatives who really want to use that lack of
specifics to play around with what they can do and really when you're told you
have to make a movie about a murder with a collection of arbitrary if not
otherwise entirely mundane objects in a fabulous mansion with secret passages
with a number of outrageous murder suspects if you're not feeding into the
natural absurdity then you're not doing your job clue the board game is focused
around up to six players named after colors there are nine rooms in the mansion
and six murder weapons the premise is that mr body the fabulously wealthy estate
owner is murdered at a party attended by all the suspects each suspect weapon
and room has a corresponding card each group is shuffled and one from each is
selected and put in an envelope to be revealed at the end of the game players
move their selected token around the board going to each room looking for clues
at any time after viewing any number of clue cards not in the envelope a player
can make a guess at which three cards are in the envelope to win a player must
guess all three correctly if the guess is wrong the player loses by default and
is removed from the game in-game lore is that they're murdered by the real
murderer clue the movie features references to every single facet of the game
including corresponding secret passages saying each room by name and having each
murder weapon included the primary difference is the addition of several
characters wadsworth the butler played by tim curry yvette the maid the cook the
cop the motorist and the singing telegram girl wadsworth and yvette specifically
add an extra element to the story as they function as the rule book they explain
to the players what this game is another difference is that mr body is not the
only body nearly everyone added to the plot is there to get murdered with a
different murder weapon the way it goes is that six guests who seem to have no
relation to each other are invited to mr body's mansion for reasons unknown
presumably some costume party they are told to only use provided monikers
colonel mustard mrs white mrs peacock mr green professor plum and miss scarlet
wadsworth guides them through the rules of the evening's festivities and after
introductions reveals that he has brought them here because they are all
connected to their absent host mr body though none of them know mr body directly
he has been secretly blackmailing all of them and wadsworth wants them to join
together to testify against mr body and have him arrested mr boddy shows up
prepared for this mutiny and has brought with him a number of murder weapons and
proposes that instead they murder wadsworth and save themselves the public
disgrace however the lights go out and mister body is murdered before the lights
come back on and then the plot gets too deliberately convoluted to release an
opposite size they need to figure out who killed mr body before the police
arrive but then people keep dying and nobody out of the core 7 can figure out
who's doing it so they all split up to search the manor in pairs for the
murderer before concluding that the murderer is in fact one of them all the
while new people are showing up at the house and also being murdered this movie
racks up quite the mr body count the film is less about plot and more about
giving some of these outrageous personalities the chance to interact with each
other you've got war criminals and embezzlers a phone service madam a black
widow who allegedly killed her husband a professor on thin ice for having
relations with his students and a gay man so it's like the republican national
convention the film's plot is also a parody of mccarthyist communist witch hunts
and a juxtaposition of true american morality being upheld by this reviled group
of people and to top off the sunday when the film was released they shot three
endings and shipped out versions to theaters at random there was no way to be
sure which ending which theater was getting two of the endings incriminated
either miss scarlett or mrs peacock but the third true ending revealed that
wadsworth was the real mr body and that he brought them all there to cover his
tracks and help him erase his evidence however it turns out mr green the gay one
was an undercover fbi agent and kills mr body now like martha baby jane and eve
harrington camp is used to highlight the ridiculousness of social conventions in
this instance though it's on purpose but the primary reason why this movie gets
remembered is because of this cast of characters specifically these horrible
women who in spite of being horrible to slay in all cases literally actually the
differences from the aforementioned examples is that clue does not make any
attempt to tone down these characters they were deliberately comedic and what
made them entertaining revolved around distilling the most outrageous elements
of them and making that the whole character start with outrageous personalities
and then build the world and plot to match that energy the shenanigans that are
considered normal in this world fit because everyone is living in it if
everyone's absurd then absurd is the new normal what also helped is that each
caricature is built around a specific expression of gender and so gender becomes
the highlight of each character which is how you ended up with a cast that more
or less focused upon a collection of very heightened women and tim curry and a
supposedly gay character which is what gave the gays something to latch on to i
hated her so much it the it flame flames flames on the side of my face and while
clue has its underground cult of queer fans who know this is a much better 80s
comedy than the reagan-era jerk-off fest that was ghostbusters the movie did not
make its money back at the box office part of the reason may have been the
studio overspending on a movie based on a board game that mystery isn't so hard
to figure out for the longest time campy movies were stuck to small budgets and
while it may have been because of mommy dearest that they began to get pulled
into the mainstream they struggled to perform well among mainstream audiences in
theaters as mentioned with clue but that isn't to say that there weren't times
when they did turn a profit and times that they did start getting handed
substantial budgets and starring actors who were once again hot off of oscar
wins believe it or not actors are people too which means a lot of them don't
mind being in frivolously fun movies they get to chew the scenery like fae but
in a film environment that won't hurt their career because the movie was never
meant to be taken seriously acting can be fun but it's a bit of a drag if every
role you do is choosing between which of your children should die in a
concentration camp yeah you'd be kidding yourself if i wasn't going to find a
reason to talk about death becomes her and meryl streep it takes a lot of talent
to make bad acting look this good because it's not just about being a bad actor
or giving a deliberately bad performance everyone in a scene needs to be
collectively developing the sensibilities they want to project if you have an
over-the-top character acting off of a wooden character it's just not going to
be entertaining there are popular comedies where everyone is completely wooden
like napoleon dynamite if anyone remembers there really i'm not sure why it made
such a splash maybe i'm just gay i don't know if everyone is acting with the
same kind of badness then it generates a world state that the audience can take
for granted and engage with and people who act normal are the odd ones look i'm
cold i'm wet and i'm just plain scared i'm here nothing to worry about i was
actually tempted to talk about rocky horror as a case study in this one but
there's enough there that it's gonna have to have its own video anyway death
becomes her star's meryl streep after she had already won two academy awards and
goldie hawn who had already won one both had been receiving nominations since
the 70s han was markedly more of a comedic actress and meryl herself was taking
a turn toward more lighthearted material as she moved into her 40s the film was
also meant to feature carrie fisher a good friend of meryl streep streep starred
in postcards from the edge two years prior a movie based on fisher's
autobiographical book of the same name it was an ambiguously fictionalized
account of fisher's own experience with rehab and her own mother she refused to
specify which elements of the story were based on fact and which were
fictionalized for reasons you only remember the bad stuff don't you what about
the big band that i got to play at that party do you remember that no you only
remember that my skirt accidentally twirled up and you weren't wearing any
underwear well but carrie's role was cut from the story to save time she was
also cast as miss scarlet and clue but had to drop out of the role when she was
admitted to rehab don't do drugs kids anyway without carrie meryl an actress who
had come up via the stage was nearly driven to the brink of madness due to the
struggle she had while working with the special effects something princess leia
would have probably been able to help her with because though critics didn't
really get the movie the special effects were cutting edge for the time yes no
death becomes her fits all the stops of camp's sensibilities to a science it's
vapid conceited feminine-centric over-acted and goes out of its way to try and
tell you that it has no substance but is instead a showcase of style meryl plays
madison ashton a broadway actress who's famous without anyone being sure why
she's famous in spite of her acclaim people struggle to tolerate her talent
enter helen sharp a childhood friend of ashton's played by han an author who is
engaged to a renowned plastic surgeon ernest melville helen takes him to see one
of madison shows and though the audience can't really stomach whatever it is
that she's doing dr melville seems to be an avid fan sharp tentatively takes him
to meet her old friend backstage where we see that ashton is frustrated with the
growing lines on her face what better fit for her than a plastic surgeon in
their apartment helen confesses that this meeting was a test that madison has
stolen every man from her and that before they got married she wanted to make
sure that ernest could be immune to madison's siren song he's not as one would
expect of a comedy pushing women into excessive levels of drama ernest's
betrayal of helen pushes her into a spiral that lasts over seven years to
articulate that she has hit rock bottom han is stuffed into an outrageous fat
suit lives surrounded by her cats eats icing from the can and torments herself
by watching ashton's horrible movies madison's career in spite of her
talentlessness has skyrocketed due to her youthful visage assisted by her
husband helen is dragged to a mental institution where the very name ashton
drives other patients into a frenzy because she just can't stop talking about
her madeline and when she is reprimanded by a therapist for refusing to let go
of madison she realizes what an excellent idea it would be to eliminate madison
fast forward another seven years and we pick up with madison and earnest ernest
has been driven to dire alcoholism and is now a reconstructive mortician since
his career as a plastic surgeon fell through though he is considered the best at
what he does painting dead bodies madison's career has also all but dried up
which she blames on her aged visage they're invited to a party for the release
of helen's new book forever young a collection of youth and beauty tips madison
agrees to attend for the chance to torment her once friend yet again going to
her spa for regular face treatment and receiving an oh so sketch business card
for an elite service madison initially blows it off but when she finds helen is
shockingly youthful and gorgeous she is thrown into a nosedive desperate she
drives to the address on the card a grand gothic castle in the heart of beverly
hills which is actually not that unrealistic the estate proprietor reveals
herself to be 71 years old despite appearing to be a woman in her 30s or her 20s
how old would you guess i am 38 28. she offers madison an opportunity a potion
of eternal youth for a steep fee and the promise that madison will stage her own
death after a certain number of years she hesitantly takes the potion and is
left with a warning now a warning take care of yourself you and your body are
going to be together a long time meanwhile helen goes to ashton's mansion and
seduces her former fiance she convinces him that they can be happy forever as
long as he kills madison ashton she outlines her whole plan and when it seems
like he's committed she leaves madison returns now youthful and without a single
care in the world and as one of those cares was once earnest she no longer has
to hide her contempt for him in a heated argument he pushes her down their
gorgeous marble staircase but as ernest calls helen to tell her in a panic that
he accidentally killed madison in a way that doesn't fit the plan madison picks
herself up and twists herself back together when taken to the emergency room it
is revealed that she's dead maybe my wrist i don't know but my neck feels sort
of sore what better fit for her than a reconstructive mortician ernest takes
this as a miracle and as a sign that he is meant to be with madison forever
perpetually fixing her up and keeping her skin radiating that healthy glow that
only a makeup airbrush can achieve helen isn't a fan of the idea as it so
happens madison isn't a fan of her she takes a shotgun from a display and blasts
helen into a fountain in the atrium taking ernest aside madison explains how
they will hide the body while helen picks herself up madison deduces that helen
drank the same potion that she did and naturally the first thing she does is
read helen for filth for writing a book about youth tips after drinking a potion
of eternal youth fake [ __ ] calling out fake [ __ ] in eternal deadlock there's
only one way for them to settle the score on guard [ __ ] you may have always
won but you never played fair oh who cares how i played i won realizing the
fight is going nowhere the girls settle down to have a heart to heart it turns
out the reason madison set out to steal every one of helen's men is because well
madison grew up in a lower income bracket than helen and in high school madison
thought that helen thought she was trash and helen agrees she did think that
madison was trash they realized that this petty squabble over boys was never
real it was just something that they were doing to hurt each other and that they
don't have to hurt each other anymore within five minutes they go from literally
killing each other to being best friends girls i'm so glad i'm gay the last time
ernest saw these women they were going for the throat now they're best friends
begging ernest to spray paint helen into a normal skin tone nothing to be done
about the hole in her stomach but just means she can't wear a two-piece anymore
ernest now sees that this is not a miracle this is a curse and that after giving
helen a fresh coat he's done and gone but the girls come to a realization what
happens when they need a touch-up and even if they hold him hostage what happens
if he dies so the kidnap him and take him to the immortal woman where she makes
a pretty convincing argument for him to drink the potion [Music] i mean i'm sold
ernest decides that immortal living seems cold and lonely and then tries to
escape from the castle and then immediately finds himself at the center of a
convention of immortal celebrities most of whom are those who we've speculated
to have faked their deaths to escape the spotlight like elvis and jim morrison
helen and madison chase him through the house pressuring him to reconsider
ernest chooses to fall to his death but instead survives and escapes 37 years
later we're at ernest's funeral with the rest of his life he became a
philanthropist adventurer and a wonderful person hilarious considering a point
is made of him being a republican do you know what they do to soft bald
overweight republicans in prison helen and madison sit in the back of the church
bitching at each other under their veils the minister's eulogy says that through
kindness and charity and the people he left to remember him fondly ernest found
the secret to eternal life the girls excuse themselves from the surface flipping
off the veils and oh god they uh needle each other for their poor makeup skills
and reference past injuries that further deteriorated their bodies while
bickering about where they parked the car and whose responsibility it was to
keep track helen ends up teetering on the edge of some steps with madison
considering just letting her fall but they're friends and helen insists that
they fall together girls the film didn't do great critically but made a tidy
profit on top of becoming a mainstay for queer audiences i feel that while mommy
dearest typified camp on an accidental level death becomes her is the perfect
instance of how to create intentional badness with a budget i find a lot of
those intentionally bad movies tend to get a little stale halfway through
because they keep leaning on the same sensibility when it comes to good bad
movies you really need to keep switching up the energy and leaning on plot
inconsistencies to keep the audience on their toes like in death becomes her
when the story is retroactively changed in the second half in the opening we see
madison as glamorous successful and confident helen is mousy dull and does not
seem to be thriving however later on the backstory is seemingly changed with no
prior indication madison was the poor and unglamorous one and it was helen who
was elegant this is never addressed or explained and in both instances the plot
was crafted like this specifically to sell emotional development whereas
continuity wasn't seen as important in many ways this typifies the style of
narrative that is trying to be everything to the point where not only did
critics not see the value in this comedy but they wholly bought into the
projected vapidity and shallowness of the characters the film was decried as
having no substance at all when in fact there's a strong communicated message
about gender normativity and presentation societal expectations and the role of
women in hollywood it's not even that hard to see it unless you yourself are
embedded in the world that the movie is making a parody of because this movie
like all good camp is criticizing the normativity of society by highlighting the
absurdity of social expectations that an old man can become beloved by all but
old women fall into obscurity this camp is funny because it's pointing out
exactly why these social tropes are so absurd by depicting these people as
acting the way society expects them to and you know women like this especially
in hollywood are rumored to exist certainly one of the memorable scenes in mommy
dearest is the clothes closet scene if it had occurred i can understand why it
did [Music] now camp as a style of comedy was still a bit niche and people who
weren't in the know might not have bought tickets what was mistaken about mommy
dearest is that it was not necessarily the film that drew the fandom but the
diva herself and indeed a large component of camp was rooted in diva worship and
there are few who so perfectly embody the deliberate camp diva than the mistress
of the dark herself cassandra peterson better known by her stage name and iconic
persona elvira a struggling actress peterson showed up to audition for what was
meant to be a temporary gig to stand in for vampira a morticia adams type host
of a local los angeles tv show that showed bad cheap b horror movies elvira was
a sexy parody of vampyra who is a parody of martisha who is a parody of the
monster ladies of classic hollywood horror movies with each separation from the
source material each version more honestly projected why the former woman had a
fandom until you got to elvira who represented the purest expression of why
producers continued to carry on the trope boobs peterson herself is a worldly
and intelligent lady who specifically had a strong hand in crafting the
character the sexual exploitation of the character itself is a parody of
hollywood production values when it comes to designing women and depicting women
in general alvaro was just stripping away the posturing boobs and once again
we're in a place where the straights have no idea why the gays are so drawn to a
woman who builds 80 of her comedic material around her cleavage without
realizing that it's because she's making fun of the people who are too
hypnotized by her undulating memories to notice that she's making fun of them in
a loving way of course so every week elvira relaxed while gleefully torturing
the audience with bad movie after bad movie popping in once in a while to let
the audience know she was in just as much pain as they were her popularity
skyrocketed as the show started being syndicated around the country eventually
leading to her strutting her way onto the big screen in elvira mistress of the
dark absolute classic that must be seen by everyone mistress of the dark follows
alvirah as she angrily quits her job hosting a bad movie tv show when the
station's new owner sexually harasses her she's going to start an act in vegas
but needs 50 grand to make the project work that's a bit of a problem since well
she doesn't have 50 grand but as luck would have it her great aunt morgana just
bit the dust and left her an inheritance so she packs up her fabulous
convertible and heads on to falwell massachusetts which she soon discovers is
filled with the most conservative boring uptight bunch of backward-thinking
people she's ever met there's a reason the town is named after the notoriously
conservative and queer-hating televangelist jerry falwell and here she discovers
that her inheritance is actually her great-aunts dilapidated house and her
poodle so she's stuck in this ratchet-ass little town until she can sell the
place the only monetary offer she gets is 50 for a recipe book from her then
unknown uncle vincent she agrees to sell it but before she can things go awry
almost every adult in town decides that she's basically the devil incarnate
though the teenagers love her the townspeople try burning her at the stake
anyway but as she has at least a little bit of luck it turns out great aunt
morgana was actually a witch the recipe book was a spell book and she can
harness some elemental forces using a ring she found laying around the house
which brings a downpour that doses the fire but now there's a new problem
because uncle vincent is actually a warlock and he wants that spell book so he
can do evil warlock things elvira leads the vicious old man back to her house
where they engage in a magical battle that sets the place on fire but elvira
wins out in the end and banishes vincent to the underworld while the house and
all the magical artifacts are destroyed the silver lining she was vincent's only
living relative so she gets his estate after his death leaving her with enough
money to hit the road and start her vegas show the movie didn't do great at the
box office when first released but has become a cult classic for gays and horror
fans alike the obvious parallels of being an outsider in a small town are well
obvious but became a big draw for queer audiences not only was elvira an
outspoken ally even in the 1980s holding fundraisers to help aids victims but
she knew exactly what being in a small town and not being normal was like she
goes so far as inviting all the town's teenagers over to her house to spruce the
place up transforming the dingy gray exterior into a cascade of rainbows and
more than a few of the cast members actually were queer because alvirah attracts
us like flies to a gorgeous corpse she also dedicated the film to robert redding
a close friend who helped create the iconic look of elvira but passed away from
complications with aids in 1986. she even named the love interest in the film
after him since the film's release elvira has remained an icon in the queer and
horror communities and last year when she released her autobiography yours
cruelly elvira she revealed to the world that she'd been in a loving
relationship with another woman since 2002 fully cementing her queer icon status
she'd been worried about coming out for years because she was convinced her fan
base would abandon her of course considering her fan base is made up of horny
straight guys women and gay men with good taste i don't think she had to worry
nearly as much as she did but going back to mistress of the dark an interesting
tidbit of information is that tim burton was actually in the running to direct
and was alvira's pick for the job since he'd done such a great job with peewee's
big adventure and she was good friends with paul rubins pee-wee herman but tim
burton didn't get his dark campy hands on the mistress of the dark he was too
busy to take on the job because of two other movies first came beetlejuice and
exercise a pure camp in and of itself and then the camp noir classic meow
[Music] camp as an aesthetic can be seen in good cinema the thing is you need to
build an entire world from the ground up this world needs to visibly function on
a separate set of established laws laws to which the visual and written aspects
relentlessly adhere this must be a world where this manner of action and style
is projected to an audience for whom their sense of reality is locked in the
suspension of disbelief so everyone involved in the process needs to commit
which is probably a rule for absurdism or fantasy rather than one exclusively
limited to camp which itself may be a sub-genre of absurdism using these rules
there are times albeit rare where camp sensibilities break through a cult
audience and end up being must-see movies as is the case with tim burton's
batman movies specifically batman returns but it's worth pointing out that
1989's batman is something i like to describe as camp noir taking every
individual trope of noir sensibilities and pushing it to impractical heights
design takes precedence over everything else the bat suit he could not move in
the batmobile with the transmission that would just get ripped out from a single
pothole the joker's singular marriage to his clownish brand it's usually not
considered camp because well because it's enjoyed by straight men and if
straight men enjoy something it must be higher than camp but it does say quite a
bit about being a social outsider batman returns just does it all better i am
just jealous because i'm a genuine freak and you have to wear a mask batman 89
was briefly the highest grossing movie of all time and while batman returns made
its budget back and then some it only made about half as much at the box office
and cost much more to make batman returns though is the one that does get
remembered on account of there being more memorable moments and though critics
lauded this movie as being superior to its predecessor parents felt this movie
was a bit too dark for their children so danny what did you think of the movie
it was very violent it was a total attack against kids the whole movie what a
little narc no really this movie became a rallying cry for parents groups this
kid can read off his memorized script that the producers fed him before the
segment sure but it doesn't change the fact that kids movies of the day could
get very violent not to mention jurassic park was only one year away so parents
groups can scapegoat the violence all they like they can target the dark imagery
but what's really going on is an attack against what they really have a problem
with i am cad woman i mean catwoman was always meant to be a little sexy and
this is true going all the way back to julie newmar and eartha kitt and early
comic books but this is a suit that michelle pfeiffer had to get stitched into
and this is a character that specifically used sex as a weapon in a way that was
closer to basic instinct than adam west you poor guys always confusing your
pistols with your prize and yes the plot of this movie is that batman is out to
stop the penguin and expose him for being a gang leader while he's running for
mayor such in such contrivances the real through line of the movie though is
carried by selena kyle her dual identity with catwoman and the chaos that
occupies her mind burton's batman movies were comfortable playing fast and loose
with character lore the important thing was that the character represented the
essence of what the character in the comics was which is why nobody is
particularly up in arms about how the first movie gave the joker a name and a
backstory and also why they were comfortable with the changes made to the
penguin and catwoman instead of being a street kid who deployed martial arts and
gymnastics to carry out heists selena is an overstressed overworked
underachieving assistant to mack shrek shrek himself being this parody of
trumpian business moguls of the 1980s while selena is competent in her work
attempts she makes to break that glass ceiling cut deeper the further she
reaches her apartment is pink and bright stuffed with doll houses frilly pillows
and stuffed animals and despite her attempt to appear as girlish as possible in
order to seem attractive to men she just can't bring herself to pretend to be
less talented and smart than she is she gets home to a message on her answering
machine where her boyfriend is dumping her because she refuses to let him win
tennis matches she also hears a message she left for herself telling her
exhausted post-work variant that she needs to go back to the office to do
something she predicted that she would forget so back she goes where she alone
finds the truth of a proposed power plant that max is trying to sell to the city
of gotham he plans to drain power from the city to hold it hostage when
confronted by him she's perfectly fine to keep this all under the table and be a
good little secretary but max doesn't really seem to like the idea of loose ends
and pushes her out a window whether she miraculously survives with severe head
trauma or whether she died and was resurrected by cat magic is unclear she makes
her way home a zombie of herself and by force of habit turns her answering
machine on when she hears a message about a service offering tips for how to
seduce and marry your boss she snaps ripping her apartment apart she targets the
soft pink things she had collected and takes a can of black spray paint to the
walls and dollhouse she so i raked havoc on some old denim and i did what any
girl would do chaos she chooses chaos she becomes catwoman and sets out to
destroy any man who has wronged her which not only is max but anyone who stands
between her and her plan to destroy him like he destroyed her which includes the
batman and after an uneasy alliance falls out the penguin too all while wearing
a mask that she feels is more comfortable than her face not all that much unlike
john crawford selena herself is locked in a dualistic psychological state
between the woman she convinced herself she had to be and the wild unpredictable
hedonistic and reactionary catwoman all the while selena goes through her nine
lives for nothing but trying to exist separately from a man's world at a
masquerade party where bruce and selena attend without masks because their faces
are the masks bruce tries his best to talk down selena from outright murdering
max but criminal justice in this society even if he did get sentenced to more
than just a slap on the wrist is not justice for selena she uses up lives four
through eight to get that revenge and then mysteriously vanishes now aside from
establishing an environment where line delivery like this is camp in itself as i
was saying i'm a woman and can't be taken for granted life's a [ __ ] now so am
i it's kind of a crime that this movie isn't held up as a sleeper feminist hit
from the 90s it's very easy to read selena's murder by max as an allegory for
sexual assault especially following her ongoing psychological breakdown over the
course of the plot but as i alluded selena's duality is indicative of the
reality of women against the patriarchy's expectations of what a woman ought to
be selena herself fails at being a woman in all respects except for the
definition of woman that she creates this woman while dripping in femininity
expresses that femininity in a way that is neither meek nor subservient but is
still undeniably peak femininity i would love to live with you in your castle i
just couldn't live with myself demonstrating that womanhood and powerlessness is
an artificial construct generated by men to keep half the population subjugated
and thus decrease the number of people who can challenge their power so what
happens when a woman does challenge their power they kill her again and again
and again even men who are allegedly allies simply by enforcing the systems of
justice that enforce her suppression the male ally in turn enforces her
suppression without intending to with gender and gender expression being brought
to the center of attention yet obscured by character pathos this is the kind of
thing the queer audiences read into even if you're just plain gay you end up
doing a whole lot more thinking about gender mechanics simply because we live in
a world that still precludes gay from various gender ideals specifically the
core of what we consider masculinity so we tune into this the reclamation and
redefinition of gender in a way that works for us rather than suppresses us and
a process that selena survives to boot and these are messages that resonate with
us in a way where pfeiffer's catwoman is still regarded as the best and which
any number of drag queens will attempt to depict but why does pfeiffer's
catwoman get elevated to a pedestal when uma thurman's poison ivy is forgotten
perhaps tragically as i told lady freeze when i pulled her plug this is a
one-woman show uma thurman is a phenomenal actress who deserves better than what
she got and deserves more recognition for the work that she's done joel
schumacher's batman films themselves befit an entirely more shamelessly obvious
definition of camp than burton's whereas bertens was a highly stylized depiction
linked together with the singular artistic theme schumacher's batman is the
death becomes her to burton's whatever happened to baby jane which is more than
valid but for most of his two movies nobody really has the slightest idea what
movie they're in it's like a collection of movie stars were pulled together to
shove their respective brands into the film the ending result is something so
disjointed and chaotic and absurdly horny that it's hard not to find it
entertaining at the very least and uma thurman seems to be the only person who
has gay friends because she knew what was up these films unlike the burton
versions were here to primarily sell toys sure but artistically the intention
was to present the idea of comic book characters because these were not the
comic book characters what killed the dinosaurs they say monkey business we've
got work to do uma thurman showed up to spill tea in a body suit her character
was constructed around a quasi-eco-terrorist vibe with a heavy overtone of magic
dr pamela eisley in the comics however is usually depicted as independent
especially of male characters in the movie however she is tied to strong male
characters who more or less run the show first gotham and then the world just
what i had in mind in conjunction with being scripted to be subservient to a man
all the while using her feminine wiles to manipulate him she was also juxtaposed
against this version of batgirl so while thurman's poison ivy was a powerful
lady who served she was foiled against the good woman one who worked with other
men and whose plot was constructed around learning how to ask them for
permission at the same time as doing that girl boss thing but camp wasn't always
destined to be married to strong feminine archetypes and subversions yes all
these films are remembered in no small part due to the strong queer following
and like schumacher queer creators worked tirelessly to project camp aesthetic
to an otherwise naive and innocent straight audience [Music] because camp was an
aesthetic so closely associated with drag queens and drag culture it only made
sense that you would start to get movies about them the public was aware that
drag queens existed though usually referred to them as slurs and having them
depicted as anything but punchlines was uncommon and thanks in part to the early
rise to rupaul who somehow managed to break out of gay obscurity and reach a
degree of public renown there was indeed a public curiosity about drag queens
and two movies about drag queens were released at roughly the same time now the
adventures of priscilla queen of the desert hereafter we'll just refer to it as
priscilla to save time was released in 1994 in australia three drag queens one
of them being a trans woman need to go cross-country to make a career-making
performance this starts hugo weaving guy pierce and terence stamp riding on the
titular priscilla the chrome tour bus that will carry them across the australian
outback the group struggles to get along amid intergenerational tension and all
kinds of road trip hijinks however its status as camp is somewhat difficult to
explain see it's australian which means it comes from a very different
collection of cultural sensibilities leaning on a bit more of what we may
consider to be dry british humor though i struggle to really say it's british
humor because for those who have seen shit's creek or other canadian comedies it
seems like the only former british colony that doesn't seem to prefer dry comedy
is america dry humor is one where a given punch line of a joke is delivered with
less emphasis in a general sense it involves far more sarcasm and delivery and
in comedic styles a reaction to the joke is far less important there's no prompt
to let you know when to laugh it's kind of up to the viewer to use their
reasoning to spot when something is funny in order to generate this kind of
comedy one requires a separate in-world state of absurdity all characters even
the straight characters have full awareness of the inherent rules of this world
and their comedic responses are built around what is outrageous by these
established standards this is abundantly clear in one of the ultimate drag queen
camp movies spice world and sensibilities like those demonstrated in spice world
are opposed to more american styles of comedy where the world is meant to be
normal with a few exceptions like phoebe from friends but as another example i
was inclined to include the british series absolutely fabulous this series
itself is pivotal in establishing sensibilities in the queer community and gets
overlooked for continuously indicating that one of the two primary characters is
actually trans femme without any character having a single problem with it it is
simply an element of the character that is taken for granted which feeds from
the generalized style of comedy where characters simply don't react to the
comedic antics of other characters within the script all individuals take for
granted that this is simply how things are which is the difficulty when it comes
to including international camp media it's played so dry and straight that north
american audiences often assume that this is simply how people act in australia
and the uk so because the comedy is downplayed to find the humor the viewer must
be intimately familiar with the given culture to know where the separation lies
between cultural absurdity and emotional realism such as in priscilla the elder
queen cleaning up the younger one after a gay bashing and the drama revolving
around hugo weaving's character having a child raised by his estranged former
wife and the trans queen falling into a romance with a backcountry mechanic they
meet by happenstance to an audience expecting a comedy to be aceventura it's not
clear when the drama ends and the comedy begins leading many to assume it's
simply a slice of australian life the themes of this movie don't necessarily
focus on gender so much as it refocuses perhaps shedding the proxy of gender
discourse to develop a discussion about queerness as a whole but having an open
discourse about queerness where the messaging of queerness was not directed to
straight people was refreshing and even if they are international actors they
were actors of some renown which is also nice to see actors taking a risk
especially at the time priscilla particularly resonates with me because there's
this kind of ending message that says that it's perfectly okay to modify your
life to accommodate being with other people that it's okay to lean in to other
people and that nobody should really be expected to be entirely independent not
necessarily a queer message but it's nice to hear that we get so much social
pressure to be completely self-sufficient at all these dumb little adulting
things that i feel like we don't take as much time as we should to just let
ourselves be human priscilla made about 30 million dollars on a budget of 2
million which with hollywood accounting is about 26 million dollars profit free
and clear so when it came to hollywood they thought hey let's see if we can do
that tu wangfu thanks for everything julie newmar was actually in development at
roughly the same time as priscilla once again for the sake of expediency we'll
be referring to this as simply to wong vu granted the length of these titles is
kind of camp in and of itself and patrick swayze is marvelous in the lead role
but we could have had willem dafoe instead part of me is a little sad about that
defoe is under consideration for the role but apparently swayze as a test went
out with the director for a broad daylight walk around new york in full drag and
was unclockable this film another road trip features two established queens
noxima jackson played by wesley snipes and vita boem played by swayze bringing a
younger queen under their wing chichi rodriguez played by john leguizamo after
winning a trip to hollywood to enter into a major drag competition they pawn the
plane tickets and use the money to buy a fabulous convertible coupe de ville to
drive to la instead the camp here like with priscilla is featured in how these
girls opt to do the entire trip in drag the early section of the film alludes to
traumatic family life and an attempted sexual assault by a police officer who
stops the working girls on the road without knowing that there were drag queens
their car breaks down a staple of all road trip movies and hijinks ensue when
the queens have to blend into a small town as women because they're never out of
drag apparently chichi becomes enamored with a local boy who believes she's a
girl or a sis girl anyway and the other two queens become frustrated with
country living while they wait for a replacement part for their car through the
duration of the movie they work to improve the lives of the locals including
standing up to the abusive husband of a woman who befriends the group the cop
who had assaulted vida who is ridiculed by his fellow officers for appearing to
have been beaten up by a girl storms over to the town where the queens are
hiding and demands their heads as payment for this humiliation the rest of the
town comes to their aid dressed in the poise of drag and chase them off the town
has a fabulous weekend festival and their car is fixed in hollywood chichi who
had always felt so insecure about her ability to be a drag queen is the winner
of the competition now while this movie like priscilla leans on camp comedy this
is quite toned down from what you would get from diva centric examples like
death becomes her and elvira mistress of the dark it's there but they don't lean
into it as much and this isn't to say that gay movies didn't do camp john waters
has an entire pre-hairspray filmography which i omitted because talking about
it's gonna have to have its own video instead of serving up shameless camp i
feel like the filmmakers here were using the platform to work in some legitimate
feelings and spread awareness which was an ongoing theme of what became a weird
glut of movies about gay people from the 1990s and 2000s kiss me guido mambo
italiano in and out edges 17 etc but the 90s as a whole had a cultural aesthetic
of taking things that were not meant to be serious and making them serious or
using frivolous framing devices to talk about things that were very serious
[Music] now to close out we are going to briefly talk about but i'm a
cheerleader so trigger warning for those who need it this is one of the
quintessential films about conversion therapy but i'm a cheerleader follows the
story of fictional character megan plumfield i specify that the character is
fictional because the more you know about how conversion therapy works the more
this feels like a horror movie because literally everything in this movie is
lifted directly from the practices of conversion therapists also known as
sadists unaware that she is a lesbian she's outed to herself by her family and
then shipped off to a conversion therapy camp the line but i'm a cheerleader is
used by megan as a defense for her presumed heterosexuality the argument here
being that she cannot be a lesbian because she conforms to typical feminine
stereotypes megan becomes trapped in a secluded location with a collection of
other gay and queer people who are out to beat the gay out of them sometimes
literally if needed they are put through a series of heterosexualizing
activities and often separated by gender the girls are pushed towards home
economics cooking cleaning and feminine things in the hopes that it will
overwrite their homosexual desires with the proper heteronormative ones again
given that megan is a cheerleader and very effeminate in her own right these are
not things that she is necessarily uncomfortable with the boys by contrast are
forbidden from cooking and cleaning instead they do manly things like
landscaping and simulated war games i mean when it comes to america's weird take
on like conversion therapy rituals preventing boys from any kind of cooking is
ridiculous like it's almost contradictory because hot cuisine is an industry
dominated by men and i don't really want to get into analyzing the logic of
people who isolate a few passages from the bible as the foundation and basis of
their entire world view but the line between boy things and girl things has been
erased and redrawn throughout history more times than you can fathom heels
introduced to europe as footwear for men so that men would always be distinctly
taller than women gender it's a thing sometimes anyway megan meets a girl graham
as one does at one of these locations and it's heavily implied that these girls
would make very good roommates but now we're getting into the territory of why a
girl like graham who is comfortable in her sexuality would allow herself to go
through this humiliating process as is normally the case it's an ultimatum put
upon kids by their family and the risk is being cast out entirely because that's
what jesus would do apparently very plain to see why the american version of
jesus was not included in neil gaiman's american gods and it's also not like the
conversion process only uses constructive processes to mold and shape gender
roles and identities there are no walls in their dorm rooms for a reason no
masturbation at night permitted and if an attendee experiences any impure
thoughts they are encouraged to shock themselves when caught making out late at
night two boys are reprimanded one runs away the other is kept back and isolated
from the rest of the group forced to sleep in a dog house the one who ran away
is rescued by two former attendees of the camp who then take megan and graham to
a gay bar where megan begins to feel more comfortable with herself and who she
is away from the confines of heterosexual society however when she's caught by
the camp she's forced to leave with graham staying behind megan is rescued by
the ex-ex-gay men and they plan a coup to rescue the kids before their
heterosexual graduation meanwhile back at the camp the gendering rituals become
more humiliating forcing boys and girls to wear skin suits with fig leaves
covering the impure parts they simulate heterosexual intercourse these proper
christians are forcing minors to engage in these rituals and yet we still let
them call themselves christians let alone good people maybe this is just a
catholic in me but i was under the impression that literally only god or jesus
or saint peter had the authority to dictate who was or was not going to hell and
therefore making the decision that another human being for committing whatever
action is going to hell is speaking in the stead of the divine figure and thus
is technically heresy which does sin due to hell but we don't need to get into
theology right now anyway the day is saved the boys get to love boys and graham
runs away with megan protected by the nice gay men in their youth shelter the
movie ends with megan's parents attending a pflag meeting so things are looking
up now while some of you especially those who have lived through experiences
like this may take issue with how much of this content was depicted frivolously
the ridiculous gender rituals were depicted for laughs which is valid if it was
depicted as a psychological thriller it would automatically lose a chunk of the
audience it's simply easier to spread this message around if it's showcased as
something lighthearted essentially trick people into misunderstanding how grave
this subject matter is until the very end anyway camp was used as a means to
give this movie gay appeal beyond simply being a story about our experiences but
also to add a lighthearted angle for straight people who needed to be massaged
into this knowledge but even then with this movie and the drag queen road trips
we see camp deployed as an aesthetic and camp sensibilities arising specifically
where there is discourse about gender however the camp itself is toned down once
again in lieu of realism for the sake of representation camp is used as a
sensibility to highlight the gender discourse but the discourse itself was one
that was meant to be seen when it comes to all about eve it seems to be a
discourse about fame and corruption on the surface whereas given the minutia of
the script it's really about the role of women in show business and the options
that women in show business are given as they age the adventures of julie newmar
the baby's afraid of a cheerleader i mean sorry camp although i totally see that
movie the thing about camp in the end is that it's oddly ageless comedy is the
fastest to age and the most likely to age badly but the extremes of camp leave
it fresh for generations to come the absurdity is a preservative [Music] it
wasn't long before the entertainment industry as a whole recognized the power of
camp not just as a way to covertly bring in queer audiences without actually
showing queer characters but as a way to bring in all audiences you see camp can
be very all-inclusive if you choose to let it be the hyper-masculinity of the
works of directors like michael bay and zack snyder are just as campy as a
busload of drag queens just pushed in the opposite extreme instead of making a
farce out of the femininity they make a farce of the masculinity whether the
director is intended to or not the glistening muscles of 300 spartans lovingly
depicted in slow motion for maximum impact led to posters for that movie
adorning the walls of just as many gay boys as straight boys when it first came
out the sequel was even supposed to feature a gay couple which snyder fought for
but was overruled by the studio at which point he left the project the sequel
instead features lena hedy in the scene-stealing role of queen gorgo a badass
powerful woman ripped from the mind of john waters and planted into a homoerotic
greek epic i'd argue that this is another drag queen role that's played by a
woman and while hollywood was accidentally turning male power fantasies into
peak camp cinema knowing filmmakers were bringing camp into the mainstream the
over-the-top caricature of an aged actress played by catherine o'hara in shit's
creek knowingly took the absurdity of faye dunaway's joan crawford and turned it
up to an 11 and then broke the dial off moira rose former soap opera starlet
seems to exist in a reality in which the golden age of hollywood never ended
even as she lives in a run-down motel clutching onto her fabulous wigs and
outfits for some comfort in the chaotic world of normalcy but this knowing camp
character earned o'hara an emmy for her career defining performance whereas it
earned dunaway or razzie decades before though nobody would argue that moira and
joan are the same kind of character the same kind of performance is given the
difference being that o'hara knows how far she's pushing it and then keeps
pushing at the right moments but brings it back in when needed creating a camp
character you wish you could be friends with instead of one you'd flee from and
of course there's rupaul's drag race now in its 144th season taking every
possible aspect of a camp's sensibility and making it mainstream drag queens who
were once the camp idols drawing crowds at gay bars are now filling stadiums as
the absurdity of a man dressing as joan crawford becomes not so absurd camp has
always had a loving cisgender heterosexual audience who either discovered it
through queer friends or just happened to be heteros with taste here on youtube
cold crash pictures has done more videos about camp classics than i ever have
and he's got a girlfriend even anime has embraced camp the intense masculinity
of shows like dragon ball z with the glistening abs and queer-coated villains
has an unintentional camp factor ed wood would cream their pants over and do not
even attempt to tell me that jojo's bizarre adventure isn't one of the campiest
things ever created in fact one could argue that camp is the primary aspect that
gives jojo's bizarre adventure its primary fandom in susan sontag's defining
essay on camp she explains that camp is a sensibility a mode of aestheticism a
private code a badge of identity the hallmark of camp she says is the spirit of
extravagance it can be broad but not everything can be camp here i disagree
because everything can be camp if it tries hard enough and that i think is my
definition of camp trying hard enough putting your all into something that
others would expect little from seeing where the limits lie and then stepping
over them enjoying your exuberant love of something instead of hiding it the
brilliant cattiness of all about eve the venomous shade of who's afraid of
virginia woolf the fabulous bitchiness of death becomes her the beautiful
absurdity of drag queen road trips the weaponized feminism of pfeiffer's
catwoman the voluptuous feathers and blinding sequins of elton john the living
art projects of david bowie the boundless genre-defying queer energy of freddie
mercury and even the glistening muscles of 300 spartans and anime supermen it's
all camp it's all more than just a little queer and it's all us we queers not so
secretly define the culture we live in no matter what the straits think so this
june of 2022 pride month in the united states go to parties parades events
seminars protests as you normally would but for those of you who don't recognize
entries in this list i hope you make some time for movie marathons by all means
watch the movies on this list but there are so many other movies and shows that
i haven't even mentioned here these are the cultural milestones that have helped
shape queer culture and have helped us endure persecution and scrutiny when the
politicians and the zealots and the turfs and the homophobes and the hate
mongers come for us and push us out the proverbial window we just keep getting
up we've got more than nine lives we've got hundreds thousands millions we
survived the trauma of our own mommy dearests and drank the potion of
immortality so we're going to be around forever no matter how many eve
harringtons try to steal our luster no matter how many small towns try to burn
us at the stake no matter how many fiends try to murder us with a candlestick in
the library we're not going anywhere hell we can take over the whole damn world
because if camp has taught us anything it's how to make the absurd into reality
[Music] [Music] [Applause] [Music] [Music] baby if you love me you become a
better man [Music] you really like it but you never [Music] baby if you find it
better [Music] foreign [Music] [Music] me [Music] [Music] sexy [Music] six
[Music] [Music] [Music] so [Music] you [Music] [Music] so [Music] uh okay
[Music] do [Music] [Music] oh uh you