---
date: 2023-05-11
title: 'Where The "Bury Your Gays" Trope Came From'
parent: pW_RjbZYi1s
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "Dying to be Gay (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
links: !!seq
  - "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8gOOSspflfA"
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03/20230511+UtRyi-e_HTc+Where+The+%EF%BC%82Bury+Your+Gays%EF%BC%82+Trope+Came+From.webm"
notes:
  - hbomb

contributors:
  downloaded: $cite$TerraJRiley

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
    celluloid_closet: { color: 2, short: "(Russo, 1987)", full: "Russo, V. (1987). <em>The Celluloid Closet: Homosexuality in the Movies</em> (Revised ed.) Quality Paperback Book Club, New York. HarperCollins n√©e Harper & Row.", url: "https://archive.org/details/celluloidcloseth00russ/page/n9/mode/2up", type: "book", style: "book" } # https://backend.ecstaticstatic.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/The-Celluloid-Closet.pdf
    wiki_summer: { color: 3, short: "Suddenly, Last Summer (Wikipedia, 2023)", full: "Wikipedia (2023, Apr 1). <em>Suddenly, Last Summer (film)</em> [Article]. Retrieved Jan 12, 2024, from", url: "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suddenly,_Last_Summer_(film)&oldid=1147675843" }
    wiki_childhour: { color: 4, short: "The Children's Hour (Wikipedia, 2023)", full: "Wikipedia (2023, Feb 27). <em>The Children's Hour (film)</em> [Article]. Retrieved Jan 12, 2024, from", url: "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Children%27s_Hour_(film)&oldid=1141905913" }
    wiki_advise: { color: 5, short: "Advise & Consent (Wikipedia, 2023)", full: "Wikipedia (2023, Mar 26). <em>Advise & Consent</em> [Article]. Retrieved Jan 12, 2024, from", url: "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Advise_%26_Consent&oldid=1146679205" }
    wiki_victim: { color: 6, short: "Victim (Wikipedia, 2023)", full: "Wikipedia (2023, Mar 27). <em>Victim (1961 film)</em> [Article]. Retrieved Jan 12, 2024, from", url: "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Victim_(1961_film)&oldid=1146846811" }
---
{% assign tustin = site.data.cite.tustin2121 %}

<compare>
<credits class="desc">

[sponsor plug]

James's Twitter: [link]  
Nicks Twitter: [link]  
MERCH: [link]  

00:00 Introduction  
07:49 Before The Court Decision  
20:20 After The Court Decision  

#lgbt #lgbtq

</credits>
</compare>

{% include transcript-start %}

this video is brought to you by ag1 as the film industry moved away from
Suburban Perfection the extensive efforts made by Hollywood to conceal
homosexuality in film during the post-war lavender scare era began to
deteriorate and then Hollywood came to realize that they were ignoring a large
audience no not gays at the time the lifeblood of Hollywood was relationship
dramas Disney and fleisure cartoons and biblical epics however they ultimately
realized that a group of Americans with disposable income but little to spend it
on was being excluded teenagers who were incensed to fight back against their
parents conservative confining outlook on life this rebellious nature spawned
arguably the most famous adolescent dissident film ever made Rebel Without a
Cause the film contained broad Illusions to alternative sexual behavior and the
Alternatives offered by gang ritualism Plato played by salminio is the Loneliest
and most troubled of the three problematic adolescents in the film the other two
being James Dean and Natalie Wood although he is not accused of it Plato was
raised by a domineering housekeeper in the absence of his father which at the
time was considered fertile breeding ground for homosexuality Plato is a
multi-faceted character who challenges traditional gender and sexuality Norms
he's a sensitive and artistic young man who admires James Dean's gym and aspires
to be like him their relationship is not explicitly sexual but homoerotic
tension permeates it Plato's attraction to Jim originates from his need for a
mask role model in his life who can offer him the emotional support that he
lacks at home Jim is a troubled teenager who struggles to blend in with his
peers and family nevertheless Jim's sensitivity and emotional vulnerability
contradict his society's expectations of masculine Behavior he is also drawn to
Plato despite being confined by the street gang culture of the 1950s the writer
of the film Stuart stem said the gang in Rebel Without a Cause isn't much
different from the Army both the rituals are tribal the affection and gang
Behavior has to be hidden inside a different vocabulary both spoken and unspoken
inside gestures and Words which desensitized everything and made everything
brutal also they had to wear skins to keep the image intact boots and leather
they had to put on a horse skin in order to feel defended against the discovery
of their own Sensitivity I don't know what other experiences in World War II
were but for us it was deliberate and conscious we were told that the buddy
system prevailed the choice of a buddy was as or more critical than that of a
bride you'd be living in a kind of physical intimacy which was unlike any other
men were having the experience of never having been so close to other men and
there was something of that love operating within the structure of the teenage
gang whose members had left home where there wasn't much love to fight each
other in the streets fighting may have been a pretext for being close and Rebel
Without a Cause when Jim and Buzz another gang Associated teen decided to enter
a chicken race to the edge of a cliff a race in which buzz will die the two
regard each other for a moment and question their participation in such an event
their encounter becomes the motivation for all that follows Jim refuses to deny
his feelings and in the screenplay stem uses the character's guilt and grief
over the death of Buzz as a weapon against Conformity one of the things I wanted
to show in Rebel is that underneath all the macho defends there was that Pure
Drive for affection and didn't matter who the recipient might be there was a
longer time in those days for young men to be in that Warrior phase where a lot
of romantic attachments were formed before heterosexual encounters happened my
favorite moment in the film is not between Jim and Plato but between Jim and
Buzz who dies in the chicken race it was tender and loving and the killing of
that boy whom Jim had known for all of 12 minutes motivated the entire last half
of the film additionally Rebel Without a Cause challenges the conventional
gender roles of women in society as well Natalie Wood portrays Judy Jim's
girlfriend who struggles to find her position in a man's world Judy's
relationship with Jim is complicated because they struggle to express their
emotions to one another however Judy's character is also noteworthy because she
challenges conventional Notions of femininity she opposes the role of the
passive submissive woman in favor of asserting her autonomy and agency the
release of pent-up emotions due to this type of emotional repression is what
ultimately kills buzz and Plato while Jim is secure in Judy's arms clearly adult
responsibilities include settling down in a heterosexual relationship contrary
to the illusions of your teenage years homosexuality is deemed ignorable until
the end of adolescence after that it's considered a sort of sign of Arrested
Development as we entered the latter half of the 1950s and beginning of the
1960s this appeared to be Hollywood's perspective on homosexuality as well
theoretically gay characters could exist in Hollywood films but only with one of
two conclusions either they straighten themselves out or they die and Hollywood
was not hesitant to make films expressing this to the audience burying your gaze
in media has existed for much longer than Twitter and Tumblr may think but
before we dive into Hollywood's exploration a forced queer trauma and film which
is I'll admit not exactly healthy let's hear a word from our sponsor which
actually is healthy this video is brought to you by ag1 ag1 is comprehensive
daily nutrition Made Simple the nutritional drink is made up of 75 high quality
Whole Food sourced ingredients carefully curated to help nourish your body with
one drink by replacing your multivitamin multi-minerals pre and probiotics
immunity support supplements and more as someone who's been on a ketogenic diet
for the last while it can be pretty hard to get the vitamins and minerals I need
daily but with ag-1 I don't need to worry about that now and not only does it
help make up for my dietary needs but it helps a lot in places I never expected
I have more energy that lasts throughout the day I've been more focused which
has been real helpful considering how many videos we've been putting out lately
and I've been getting better sleep and it actually tastes good it's become a
regular part of my morning routine and doesn't leave me with that energy crash
in the afternoon I always got when drinking tea or coffee if you're ready to
simplify your own health and nutrition tap my link in the description to get a
one-year supply of immune supporting vitamin d3k2 and 5 travel packs for free
with your first purchase [Music] thank you [Music] [Music] thank you [Music] TN
sympathy is a classic example of repression through coercion the play and film
have become so emblematic of the traditional remedy for homosexuality securing
the love of a decent woman in the nick of time that people have forgotten that
it's actually a tale about a timid heterosexual Robert Anderson who adapted his
own play for the big screen in 1956 employs the classic Outsider archetype of
the man who marches to the beat of a different drummer and must endure the
ridicule of his peers in neither the film nor the play as it ever suggested that
the sensitive student Tom Lee might prefer men over women the issue at hand is
the allegation of homosexuality Lee's classmates Call Him Sister boy because
like Jim from Rebel Without a Cause he refuses to run with the pack Tom prefers
Bach to baseball and the companionship of his housemaster's wife Laura to touch
football his male tormentors disregard the fact that he is obviously in love
with the Elder woman because he does not fit the stereotypical male role in the
Vincent film the majority of the accusatory remarks about homosexuality were
toned down Thomas found swimming nude with a teacher who is also suspected of
being gay in the play in the film he's labeled queer because he's discovered
stitching a button onto his shirt while lounging on the seashore with a group of
Faculty spouses the suppressed homosexuality of Tom's primary Tormentor the
masculine housemaster played by Leif Erickson who married Laura to establish his
masculinity is also subdued in the film adaptation Ericsson disregards Laura in
favor of the young male Macho pupils that he instructs in Tea and Sympathy a
heterosexual youth is falsely accused of homosexuality by adults whose sporting
activities provide the most homoerotic action on screen Tom Blends in well as a
scapegoat Femme in the well-established friendships between his classmates
therefore the film Advocates tolerance not for sexual deviation but for
disadvantaged heterosexuals who are less masculine never is homosexuality
considered a viable option for a genuine man the message is that one cannot
presume a young man is homosexual solely on the basis of his football
performance when Laura ultimately sleeps with Tom she is not sparing him from a
life of sissiness but rather from his own fear that his classmates may be
correct about his sexuality a fear that has already led him to attempt suicide
writer Robert Anderson said to me it was never a play about homosexuality when
Leif Erickson hounds Tom Lee he's really persecuting what he fears in himself
Tian sympathy which again was not about homosexuality nevertheless served as a
lesson for a generation of gay men who perceived Tom Lee's tormentors pointed
accusations not as timid heterosexuals but as horrified homosexuals the film was
able to convey a portion of what actual homosexuals felt and experienced in the
1950s while staying faithful to the cultural imperative of invisibility cultural
necessity was of course in the hands of the production code and there was never
any thought given to making the homosexuality in NT and sympathy more overt in
the film even the prospect that someone could be gay in reality was eliminated
prior to the commencement to filming Deborah Kerr wrote to Vincent Minnelli the
Breen office is very difficult about the homosexual angle which is I understand
their objection adultery is okay impotence is okay but perversion is their bet
Noir in fact adultery was not okay and so it came under attack from the Catholic
Legion of decency anyway the already altered ending of Tea and Sympathy had to
be made to reflect the necessary retribution for Laura's affair with Tom thus
the finished movie taught that instruction and initiation by an older woman was
a positive thing but that at the same time such Behavior could not be condoned
at least not for the woman Laura gives herself to Tom undoes the top button of
her blouse and says years from now when you talk about this and you will be kind
this is how the stage version concludes the fall of the curtain left the
conclusion of the encounter to the audience's imagination this however was not
good enough for Hollywood it filmed the seduction scene with a subdued reverence
reminiscent of a church service the way the scene was filmed in the woods with
the birds chirping and the special lighting made it appear more like the second
coming of Christ than the first coming of Tom Lee a glaring epilogue provides
the morally correct conclusion that makes the preceding material acceptable to
the Legion of decency at his class reunion 10 years later Tom wears the largest
gold wedding band ever observed up close on film Tennessee Williams stepped up
to the plate to provide what became yet another comment on the foreign gay twice
previously Williams's plays were adapted for the big screen with significant
homosexual references removed in each instance the adapters asserted that the
homosexual aspects of the play were not needed from a dramatic point of view in
1951 the pro problem that Blanche Dubois encountered with her husband was
omitted from the film adaptation of A Streetcar Named Desire in 1958 the
homosexual implications in the relationship between brick and the deceased
Skipper were removed from Cat on a Hot Tin Roof in both instances The Producers
emphasized that homosexuality was not the point and was readily discarded in
favor of more acceptable explanations then in 1959 two years before the
production code was actually revised to permit homosexual subject matter on
screen Suddenly Last Summer dealt with the subject as a psychosexual circus act
as the 1950s almost demanded the homosexuality of Sebastian Venable Williams's
condemned poet could be inferred but not shown if the Breen office granted
special permission as a consequence of the combination of insanity and
cannibalism the film had an unpleasant sickly Ambiance that made everyone
involved approach it with caution Catherine Hepburn who portrayed Violet Venable
Sebastian's deranged mother publicly conveyed her disdain for the topic Ken
Geist the biographer of director Joseph Vanquis claims that mankowitz and
Spencer Tracy spent the greater part of an evening in Boston explaining
homosexuality to Catherine Hepburn but she flatly refused to believe that such
people existed she need not have made such a commotion over Suddenly Last Summer
though in a meeting with producer Sam Spiegel and screenwriter Gore Vidal the
Breen office eliminated all references to homosexual relationships Gore Vidal
said my script was perfectly explicit and then the Catholic Church struck the
Legion of decency after seeing that the necessary Cuts were made gave the film a
special classification since the film illustrates the horrors of such a
lifestyle it can be considered moral in theme even though it deals with sexual
perversion it was resolved that Sebastian Venable would not appear in person in
the film according to Vidal he was destined to be a glimmer an occasion for
memory with this decision Hollywood had accomplished the unthinkable it has
portrayed an invisible gay man on screen in the film Elizabeth Taylor's
character Catherine recounts how she and Sebastian spent their days in a Spanish
Hamlet on the seashore and discloses that Sebastian used her to seduce young men
Sebastian's efforts were effective due to the boy's desperation for cash however
when he began to make preparations for his departure to Northern Europe
Sebastian and Catherine were accosted by a group of youths pleading for money on
a scorching day when Sebastian rebuffed their advances they pursued him through
the city streets Sebastian attempted to flee but the boys followed him wherever
he went in the meantime Catherine had been feverishly attempting to catch up to
Sebastian but when she finally did she found him surrounded by men Catherine
claims that they tore Sebastian apart limb by limb and ate him Henry Hart a film
critic discussed the origins of Suddenly Last Summer in the January 1960 issue
of films in review it is said that Tennessee Williams wrote Suddenly Last Summer
when a psychiatrist advised him that for his own sake not to mention societies
he had better stop denigrating normality and begin to expose the evils of
homosexuality and its Allied forms of Vice this Williams did regardless of
whether the advice actually came from a therapist Williams's tormented depiction
of a flailing homosexual artist and the individuals he victimizes with his
aberrant impulses is a classic horror Tale the creature is finally destroyed by
an angry mob of Street Urchins in a climax similar to that of James Wales
Frankenstein in which the peasants pursue the monster to the top of a hill where
he is consumed by Flames what emerged from Suddenly Last Summer was a simple
horror film with a budget a film with a high moral tone that was ultimately
unable to investigate its own subject but even the overt mention of
homosexuality in a film starring Catherine Hepburn and Elizabeth Taylor shook
the foundations on which the production codes aversion to homosexuality stood
the erosion of the power of the production code to maintain specific taboos had
begun at the outset of the 1950s and was only eroding Evermore as time went on
the California state Supreme Court ruled in early 1959 after analyzing a case
involving a screening of Kenneth anger's fireworks that homosexuality is older
than Sodom and Gomorrah and is a legitimate subject for screen treatment if
handled properly the ruling overturned the conviction of an exhibitor who had
been fined 250 and sentenced to three years probation for displaying the film
fireworks in 1957. variety referred to fireworks as an attempt to convey through
impressionism the homosexual outlook on life in general and noted that the court
opinion stated that homosexuality is not to be endorsed but Society must
understand its causes and effects after homosexuality as a subject reached
commercial film houses seven years later Kenneth enger's Scorpio Rising was
eventually released in theaters albeit specialized Art House theaters such as
New York's Bleaker Street Cinema and caused a similar stir once more the film
was interpreted to symbolize homosexual life and attitudes in General Andrew
Saras drew a homophobic conclusion after viewing Scorpio rising in the Village
Voice and observing that anger Compares a depraved homosexual orgy to footage
from an ancient film about the Life of Christ why the parallel with Christ what
else is there for attractive homosexuals over the age of 30 besides crucifixion
the treatment of fireworks and Scorpio Rising by the courts Distributors and
critics indicated how the code would ultimately evolve even in enlightened
circles homophobia was far too pervade and unchallenged for homosexual themed
films to be evaluated objectively based solely on their cinematic Merit there
would be no recognition of the legitimacy of gay subject matter only a
condescension to a an intermediate adult audience Hollywood was determined to
reach without alienating the old fogies Spartacus was one of the last commercial
films to have homosexuality expunged from its script before the code was amended
in a scene between crassius and his adolescent subordinate antoninus who did not
look like an adolescent the elder man discreetly establishes his preference for
both men and women do you eat oysters when I have the master do you eat snails
no master do you consider the eating of oysters to be modeled and the eating of
snails to be immoral my taste includes in both snails and oysters this exchange
was excised from the finished film immediately followed by antoninus's departure
to join Spartacus and the other slaves in Revolt what is therefore lost is any
indication of antoninus's dread of having a homosexual relationship with
crassius the fear that causes antoninus to flee at that time so it just kind of
comes out of nowhere such omissions prompted producers and writers in the film
industry to lament that the code restricted their artistic freedom and prevented
Hollywood films from competing in the mature marketplace with foreign films that
dealt with such subject matters openly at the beginning of the 1960s the
prohibition against sex perversion was the only specific restriction on subject
matter still in place for movie censorship the merch company co-producers of
William Wyler's The Children's Hour launched a meticulously orchestrated
campaign in the summer of 1961 to prepare the public for the inevitable they
disclosed that Wyler's second adaptation of Lillian Hellman's play would restore
lesbian implications to the story which had been adapted in 1936 with all such
references glaringly absent in the film former College classmates Martha Doby
and Karen Wright establish a private residential school for girls in the early
1960s Karen agrees on a wedding date with her boyfriend a doctor Joe Carden
after two years of Engagement Joe is related to the powerful Emilia Tilford
whose granddaughter Mary attends the school Mary is a Pampered manipulative
adolescent who abuses her peers while Mary is being disciplined for a lie she
told one of her companions overhears Martha and her aunt Lily arguing Lily
accuses Martha of having an unnatural relationship with Karen Mary shares this
information with her grandmother Mary fails to convince others that she
personally witnessed Martha and Karen interacting but compels Rosalie another
girl to confirm her story by using her knowledge that Rosalie has stolen jewelry
and other personal items from a number of people around the school tiny little
blackmailer Mrs Tilford is sued for libel and slandered by the two women but a
few months later Martha and Karen have lost the suit and are sequestered at the
school having lost all of their pupils and suffering irreparable damage to their
reputations as a result of the loss Karen breaks off her engagement with Joe
after he inquires as to whether the rumors are true or not and Martha explains
that other female couples have persevered despite being discovered due to the
intensity of their love and then confesses that she actually is in love with
Karen and has been in love with her for years oh it's just as long as I can
remember but I never knew what it was until all this happened Karen asserts that
Martha's sentiments are merely confused but Martha insists that it's love while
breaking down into tears Mary's deception regarding Martha and Karen is exposed
when Rosalie's mother discovers the stolen items her daughter has retained Mrs
Tilford tells the judge who then reverses the outcome of the litigation and
decides to publish results in the newspaper and pay the teachers a full
Financial settlement but everything has come too late and Karen discovers that
Martha has hanged herself in her room a year later the political drama film
advise in consent based on Alan drury's Pulitzer prize-winning novel of the same
name was released the film examines the intricate and frequently treacherous
world of politics in Washington DC where a nomination for secretary of state
becomes the Battleground for personal and political agendas while the film
predominantly focuses on political Intrigue and Corruption the character of
Senator Anderson portrayed by Don Murray discreetly investigates homosexual
themes young Utah senator Anderson is designated chairperson of the committee
responsible for assessing the Secretary of State nominee proposed by the
president as the confirmation hearings continue Anderson begins to suspect that
the nominee May Harbor communist sympathies which could compromise National
Security however Anderson's personal life is scrutinized when he is coerced by a
former male admirer who threatens to reveal their past relationship if Anderson
does not withdraw his opposition to the nomination the film's portrayal of
homosexuality is nuanced but it emphasizes the personal and professional dangers
gay people confronted in a society that was still primarily antagonistic toward
them at the time Senator Anderson is portrayed as a sympathetic figure who
struggles with the contradictions between his private and public lives he is
conflicted between his responsibility as a senator to safeguard the nation and
his desire to live an authentic existence as a gay man the film illustrates how
his sexual orientation could be used against him not only by political
adversaries but also by those who sought to exploit his vulnerability for
personal gain in the end Anderson's wife receives Anonymous phone messages from
a man warning that if the subcommittee does not report favorably on the nominee
information about what occurred between Anderson and Rey in Hawaii will be made
public an anxious Anderson travels to New York to meet a fellow Army veteran
named Ray shaft shaft confesses to selling evidence of a previous gay
relationship between the two leading to Anderson suicide the film victim was
released the same year Melville Farr played by Dirk Bogard appears to be a
successful London attorney in a loving marriage but he conceals his sexual
orientation from everyone when his ex-lover Barrett contacts him for assistance
in paying off some blackmailers he disregards his requests Barrett has stolen
money from his employers and has been apprehended by law enforcement knowing
that his sexual orientation would soon be revealed he commits suicide in his
jail cell Farr now plagued with remorse resolves to take on the blackmailing
organization but each of the victims he approaches refuses to assist preferring
to pay the money to keep their private lives hidden knowing that Dirk Bogart
himself lived his life as a closeted gay man makes victim all the more poignant
from a retrospective standpoint those who were familiar with the industry at the
time claimed that his refusal to enter into a marriage of convenience hindered
his prospects at a successful career in Hollywood Hollywood continued to produce
similar Works throughout the 1960s and Beyond despite widespread criticism of
these and other films that perpetuated the barrier gaze Trope numerous lgbtq
plus activists and Advocates viewed the trend as evidence of a hostile broader
cultural and political climate towards the community as a whole they argue that
the Trope contributed to a culture of dread and shame surrounding queer
identities and reinforced detrimental stereotypes of queer individuals as ill
immoral and dangerous the practice however persisted well into the New
Millennium but there was a faint glimmer of hope on the horizon as the 60s came
to a close with the Stonewall uprisings ultimately bringing the lives of gay
people to the attention of the general public and then the gay inclusive x-rated
Midnight Cowboy won the Oscar for Best Picture the Norms surrounding the
depiction of gay characters in film began to disintegrate gay people could now
exist in Hollywood but for how long as we close out this episode I want to thank
all my patrons it's only because of you that videos like this are possible
YouTube isn't all too friendly when it comes to pushing queer content let alone
historical queer content in fact in most cases they try their best to keep it
hidden so our amazing patrons are the reason this channel keeps going thank you
all so much your support and getting to talk to you on the patreon Discord it
really means the world to me and if you'd like to become a part of this
seriously amazing Community you can do so for as little as a dollar a month at
the link in the pin comment all right now I'll let the credits roll and I'll see
you next month for unrequited episode five a crack in the closet amen foreign
[Music] foreign [Music] thank you foreign [Music]