---
date: 2023-01-01
title: '"Attack on Titan" and the Death of Media Literacy'
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "The Important Non-Meaning of Attack on Titan"
  - '"Attack on Titan" and the End of Media Literacy'
  - "You're Wrong About Attack On Titan (Thumbnail)"
  - "Beyond The Wall (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
  - "Attack on Titan"
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-videos-backup"
  - "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Le14V0K2Fw" # Reuploads channel
# description: "a video essay on...?"
notes: 
  - hbomb

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
since it premiered in 2013 the attack on Titan anime has been called the
greatest anime ever produced the most overrated anime ever produced and the most
dangerous anime ever produced but which opinion is right maybe just maybe
they're all wrong I didn't watch Attack on Titan at first because I was in my
anime as for kids phase and only really got into it earlier this year when
countless people online were telling me how gay the relationship between Levi
and arabin was after watching the show I have no idea what they were talking
about I don't see gay going on anywhere between these two Historia and Emir yes
obviously Emir loudly proclaimed that she wanted to marry Historia Jean and
Marco absolutely in my mind they loved each other but Marco didn't live long
enough to see anything come of it but Levi and Ervin I just don't see it but
even though I didn't see the gayness your ship is valid regardless I still found
myself becoming utterly transfixed by this show to the point where I ended up
watching all 87 episodes in about three days but not everyone is so in love with
the series the show and manga on which its base have been attacked for
portraying the eldians the race of people who live inside the walls as an analog
for Jewish people and since eldians can turn into man-eating monsters something
Jewish people have been accused of being able to do in the past believe it or
not the analogous connection has made more than a few people uneasy the fact
that actual white nationalists have tried to embrace Attack on Titan as a story
that expresses their Theory the Jews are purposefully oppressing and attempting
to eliminate European people through Mass migration and brainwashing hasn't
helped the show's defense many of these people are embracing it not for its
representation of a Jewish analogy as fighting to survive against a much larger
Force but as a defense of white nationalism the they seem to see the opposite of
what normal fans see they see themselves as the oppressed eldians while the
oppressing Marlins are the Jewish analog to them because they failed every media
literacy course they ever took but they still gravitate toward the story
nonetheless which many find problematic I say we shouldn't be letting the
alt-right take ownership of well anything but that's me so yeah Attack on Titan
is handling incredibly charged issues and bringing some extremely radical people
into its midst some of whom appear to be rooting for the mass genocide at the
end of the story rather than realizing that every lead character -1 from the
first three seasons sees it as awful and wrong most of the show's principles are
articulated in a clumsy Manner and it's clear why some people have been alarmed
by how it's portrayed that doesn't excuse people from not being fair to the show
simply because some members of the alt-right enjoy it in some ways though Attack
on Titan may not be inherently fascist but it speaks to a fascist urge in Attack
on Titan the nature of oppressor and oppressed is fluid and ambiguous the
humanity stuck between those who assume these identities don't really recognize
or comprehend them when their skulls are crushed and the survivors reflect on
watching their loved ones perish in agony all that is left of our life stories
are the deeply personal horrors of humankind's inhumanity toward other humans
and the horror that your precious life can be drained from your body in an
instant by forces you do not even comprehend so let's bite into this world let's
rip open the nape of its neck and see what's inside this franchise that has
become one of the best-selling mangas in history one of the most watched animes
ever and one of the most hotly debated pieces of media of the New Millennium but
first how about you stomp that subscribe button below and ring that Bell so
YouTube actually does what it's supposed to and lets you know when I put a new
video out and if you like this video check out my patreon Linked In the
description there's a bunch of really cool perks that come with being a patron
so don't miss out alright now let's make like hanji and figure out what's going
on inside this monster called Attack on Titan foreign [Music] [Applause] the
story of Attack on Titan is it's a lot skip ahead to part two if you don't want
manga spoilers season one the what the hell is going on season a boy named Aaron
Yeager resides in the town of shaganchana which is situated on the outermost of
three circular walls that Shield its residents from the gigantic mindless
man-eating Titans but one day two new Titan species the Colossal Titan and the
Armored Titan breakthrough Aaron manages to flee while his mother is devoured by
a Titan along with his best friend Armin and his adopted sister Mikasa he swears
Vengeance on all Titans and enlists in the military five years later the
Colossal Titan Attacks again this time closer to the second wall during this
attack Aaron discovers the secret power that allows him to transform into the
sentient attack Titan and uses it to effectively protect the city this draws the
attention of the survey corps a military group once used to explore the
titan-ridden world outside the walls led by Commander Ervin Smith he intends to
use Aaron's Newfound power to reclaim the broken wall ervin's second in command
a short King named Levi takes it upon himself to whip Aaron into shape before
they go explore beyond the walls soon Aaron and his comrades come upon a
sentient female Titan while exploring the forest between the walls and
eventually identify her as their fellow Soldier Annie leonhardt Aaron battles
Annie and defeats her with the help of his other soldiers but Annie encases
herself in a crystal form and is hidden away from the public during the battle
it is revealed that there are other sentient Titans within the very walls of the
city sleeping Giants waiting to be awoken season 2 the plot armor Titan season
soon after the intelligent Beast Titan and other mindless Titans mysteriously
appear within the walls without leaving any signs of how they got there one of
the newest survey corps grads Amir reveals that she can also change into an
intelligent Titan the jaw Titan and a girl named Krista who Amir is in love with
reveals herself to be Historia Reese a descendant of the ancient royal family
two other members of the team Reiner Braun and bear told Hoover reveal
themselves to be the Armored Titan and Colossal Titan respectively an attempt to
kidnap Aaron but fail during the incident Aaron discovers a new power within
himself known as the coordinate which enables him to control other Titans this
forces Rhino and Bertolt to run and Amir goes with them offering herself as a
sacrifice to keep Historia out of Harm's Way season 3 the [ __ ] gets
complicated season the survey corps is being targeted by military police led by
Kenny Ackerman Levi's Uncle while Aaron and his companions join Levi's Squad
they learned that Historia and her father Rod Reese are the only living members
of the royal Dynasty and that the current King is a pretender on the throne they
also learned that one can acquire the abilities of another Titan shifter by
transforming into a Mindless Titan and eating it Rodriguez kidnaps Aaron and
reveals that Aaron is in possession of not only the attack Titan but the
founding Titan which Aaron's father Grisha acquired after eating Rod's daughter
Frida Reese the day the wall fell and then passed it along to his son after a
violent altercation in which Historia decides to rebuff her father's demands to
become a Titan Rod drinks Titan spinal fluid and becomes a gigantic abnormal
Titan but is killed by Historia who is then crowned queen with The Pretender
King now off the throne the survey corps leads a successful operation to
recapture shaganchana fighting the Beast colossal armored and cart Titans but
suffering massive casualties including Aaron's best friend Armin who is nearly
killed by the Colossal Titan but Armin is turned into a Titan himself and
acquires ownership of the Colossal Titan by eating Bertolt while Ervin dies in a
suicide run against the Beast Titan and is then at least partially Avenged by
Levi being the absolute biggest badass of bad asses then Aaron and his comrades
returned to the ruins of his child own where they learn the truth about their
world that they are aliens sworn opponents of the imperialist Marlins and were
imprisoned within the walls after the original King Fritz fled the conflict they
are not as they were informed the last people alive but rather a small sect of
eldians on an isolated island called parody over the course of the next year the
survey corps kill all the remaining pure Titans on the island and for the first
time in their lifetimes make it to the Sea where Aaron resolves to wipe out the
enemies across the water season 4 part 1 the what happened to my favorite
character season across the sea Marley continues to oppress their eldian
population treating them like dirt turning them into mindless Titans and sending
them to fight Wars of expansion for them and brainwashing most of them into
thinking that they're evil and can only be Redeemed by becoming a Titan and
fighting for them three years after killing off the last of the Titans on parody
the survey corps attacked Marley's Capital Liberia led by Aaron and his
half-brother Zeke the Beast Titan Aaron kills Willie Tiber an eldian who had
been controlling Marley from the shadows and takes custody of the until now
unseen War Titan after eating its former owner Willie's sister Lara Aaron had
infiltrated Marley and gained the trust of several of its citizens before this
leaving his friends in the dark as to where he was or what he was doing so once
the attack is over and Aaron is back home he is imprisoned but escapes with the
help of a group of fanatical soldiers who have dedicated themselves to Aaron
known as the jagerists Zeke who is revealed to have Royal Blood and therefore
special Titan abilities is imprisoned by Levi but manages to escape but not
before Levi does some serious damage to him meanwhile Marley's air fleet led by
Reiner launches an attack on parity season 4 part 2 the exposition season Aaron
and Zeke managed to come together which takes them to the paths an
interconnected set of gateways connecting all the subjects of Emir through time
and space where they encounter the mind of Emir the original Titan not the
lesbian Emir a different one whose tortured past has kept her in prison for
thousands of years within the path bill ing the world's Titans head of sand one
by one Zeke tries to persuade Amir to Grant his request of sterilizing all the
subjects of Emir her descendants therefore ending the Titan threat forever and
ending the suffering of all aliens however Aaron persuades Amir instead to
unleash the rumbling letting loose those thousands of colossal-like Titans held
within the walls of parody and guiding them on a genocidal march to slaughter
everyone outside the island to stop Aaron's maniacal Mission the former
leadership of the survey corps joins forces with the remaining marlian forces
including Reiner and a decrystallized Annie season 4 part 3 the manga ending and
maybe anime ending season after an apocalyptic battle atop Aaron's Elder Torah
of a final form Levi kills Zeke in a mysterious monster that is the source of
all the Titan's Powers leaving Mika said to kill Aaron causing the Titans power
to vanish and release every person who had been transformed into a Titan it's
revealed that what happened was part of Aaron's plan all along because he could
see the future and the past and was basically omniscient there for a bit as the
rest of the world is rebuilding Armin and his comrades begin peace talks led by
Queen Historia Mikasa berries Aaron beneath a tree on a hill in Chicago District
but over time the world does not see peace instead only new forms of warfare as
is the nature of humankind their home District of Chicago has turned to Rubble
in one such conflict and the series concludes with a boy approaching the giant
tree that has grown around Aaron's grave which Bears a striking resemblance to
the tree in which Emir connected with the progenitor of the Titan's power
Millennia ago all right clear as mud makes a lot more sense while you're
watching or reading it if you're interested in a breakdown that focuses more on
the emotional beats of the story check out totally not Mark's Colossal Titan
review video it's long but totally worth the watch okay now let's talk about the
drama to a large extent people started feeling uneasy about Attack on Titan once
the manga explained the Titan's Origins finally answering the series spanning
question what is in Aaron's family's House's basement Aaron's father Grisha left
behind a journal outlining that the outside world isn't uninhabited at all that
there is a wide world out beyond the walls the people of parity are of a race
called eldians All of whom have the ability to transform into Titans under
certain circumstances who are the descendants of the first Titan Emir and in
this outside world eldians are corralled into ghettos and forced to wear
armbands to distinguish them they spend their lives being told how their Titan
ancestors ruled the world with an Iron Fist and that they must atone for the
sins of their tyrannical ancestors regardless of the fact that there isn't
really any proof that said eldian empire ever actually existed its existence is
only spoken of by people who would have been told about it via anti-eldian
propaganda regardless the people of Marley the continent across the Shores from
parity constantly fear the reprisal of this mythical eldian war machine where
the wicked eldians from parody will rise up and use the power of the Titans to
rule or destroy the world once more so ldns in Marley who live inside ghettos
must toil in labor to prove that they aren't like the Devils from within the
walls of parody Aaron's father held different philosophy that the founding Titan
Emir was actually a benevolent goddess she used her Titan blood to carve roads
erect Grand buildings and defend her people from the interloping forces and that
it was the people of Marley who jealously seized the power of the Titans
castamere's descendants away and forged a false history of propaganda to
suppress those eldians who did not flee to parody Grisha Yeager believed that
the eldians were not Devils but the chosen people of God which in euro-american
rhetoric chosen people of God carries a very specific meaning and in conjunction
with the ghettos and armbands there seems to be a direct comparison this leads
some viewers who interpret this storyline as being too similar to anti-semitic
conspiracies which typically assert the Jewish people govern the world via some
sort of ancient illuminati-esque cabal for instance there is a well-respected
LDN family in Marley The tibers Who owe their honorary Marley and status to
their role in driving the LDN royalty away from the cotton into 100 years ago
and though they may be eldian the Tiber family has for Generations use their
wealth and influence to manipulate global politics which may mirror real-world
conspiracies that say that secret Jewish organizations already secretly Run the
World this facet of the show has helped others such as dot pixis's character to
stand out the Creator and writer Hajime asiyama has said that the character of
Pixis a military General was based on the real life World War II General akiyama
yoshifuru who isiyama said he respected and is revered by many in Japan despite
having committed war crimes particularly in Korea isayama's statement about this
which came from a 2010 blog post before Attack on Titan was published led to
death threats against the author because everything leads to death threats these
days which ends up delegitimizing your argument because no matter what he
believes you threatened to kill him so now he's the victim and before you turn
around and say how dare he commit war crimes please examine how we white
westerners prop up the likes of Winston Churchill who ignored the deaths of
three million East Indian and then British subjects and other figures like
American president Teddy Roosevelt who said I don't go so far as to think that
the only good Indians are the dead indians but I believe nine out of every 10
are and I shouldn't like to inquire too closely into the case of the tenth we
take for granted that their pillars of our culture because they gave a speech or
something regardless that they were privy to massacres in genocide in our own
culture there is such an air of veneration around these figures the criticism is
almost a cultural Taboo it's not uncommon for creators to have problematic views
ones which are rooted in their own cultural upbringing even leftists give a pass
to FDR as being a great president and ignore the fact that he locked up hundreds
of thousands of Japanese Americans during World War II but nobody calls him a
fascist well Republicans might but not for the right reasons some have even gone
so far as to call Attack on Titan itself fascist and anti-semitic because while
Attack on Titan does have a large fandom of normal people it also has a notable
and Loud right-wing fan base the new Republic even dubbed it the alt-right's
favorite manga anime fans have gotten themselves into a tangle trying to
decipher where asayama dries the line between the metaphors he engages in and
his own personal convictions but Attack on Titan contradicts this ayama's
apparent nationalism would Armin not be as put off by the alt-right adopting the
anime as he is by the actually very fascist jagerists bearing in mind that all
the main characters in the show end up fighting against Aaron's imperialist
march across the world in the end to me this raises an important question if the
alt-right is under the impression that a piece of media is for them are we just
gonna roll over and let them have it with content like say Fight Club should we
just relinquish this media because the right famously has such poor media
literacy that they do not realize it's actually making a mockery of them the
novel on which the film is based was written by Chuck palahnuk a gay author
whose career is marked by satire and subversion he sought to criticize toxic
masculinity by first pointing out how inherently gay masculinity and Firming
rituals actually are and secondly by highlighting that the boys will go to any
lengths to prove their masculinity the message of Fight Club is not that boys
should not talk about Fight Club it's that maybe boys should talk about their
feelings or else they might be persuaded to commit domestic terrorism instead of
fighting for this media's direct subtextual meaning and holding on to it in
spite of the right wing following we just roll over and let them add another
piece of media to their Library the problem being the larger this collection of
lib owning content grows the more credible they feel alternately and This
concerns me I've begun to wonder if the left also lacks the media literacy
needed to properly gauge that fight Club is specifically subverting the values
and sensibilities that the protagonists represent an unfortunate Trend I've
noticed specifically in American Film criticism is that analysts don't seem to
understand that they're not always meant to identify with the values of the main
character just because they're the main character sometimes the protagonist is
the villain as is the case with the nameless protagonist of Fight Club but is
this the case with Aaron Jaeger especially as the series reaches its apocalyptic
conclusion as Attack on Titan comes to a close the question becomes how to
interact with it and also whether or not a show can handle fascist ideas in the
manner with which it does without being fascist and anti-semitic itself isayama
declined to comment on the topic saying being a writer I believe it is impolite
to instruct your readers the way of how to read your story a large portion of
the anime Community as a generic group hold Attack on Titan with very high
regard you've probably seen some of the show's recognizable symbols especially
its military insignia even if you haven't seen the anime or read the Manga it's
based on if anything you've probably heard portions of the iconic first season
theme song which is a banger [Music] to introduce many people to anime and manga
which is what makes criticism so tricky it's hard to criticize one's First Love
however being unable or unwilling to address the problems in Attack on Titan's
fictional world has caused a long simmering unresolved conflict within the anime
fandom and Titan seems like it could be easily written off as plainly
pro-fascist the central character is a pro-military fanatic who uses his Pariah
status to justify mass extinction the militarism of the story is reflected in
the opening sequence of the anime's first season with the lyric I am a soldier
granted when it comes to All Things fashion and Attack on Titan viewers always
have to read into it characters never specifically come out and talk about
fascism either methods or ideology in specific terms this may include discussion
about oppression indoctrination propaganda and dehumanization of a national
enemy and while all of these elements may be deployed in a fascist regime they
are not exclusive to Fascism in fact not all fascism is the same the term is
often deployed against things that specifically draw from the posturing and
methodology of the Third Reich though while it is true to say that all Nazis
were fascist not all fascists were Nazis that said when it comes to the specific
elements of Attack on Titan that are implicitly drawn from the Third Reich these
elements are mostly visual the LDN ghettos and Marley are never called ghettos
for instance we pick up on that from the way they directly resemble ghettos from
the 30s and 40s when it comes to what is written the depiction of fascism is
much more generalized routinely dialogue leans toward valuing People based on
how they can serve the military this is present in both the forces of parody and
Marley what good you are to society is dependent upon how you can advance the
agenda of the state however the bulk of the show's latent fascist moralization
is focused on Erin Yeager and especially his Cult of Personality the jagerists
this is a group that grew out of a branch of the military specifically the
branch that had been depicted heroically from the first three seasons the survey
corps the scouts themselves were depicted as Plucky desperate dreamers they
reached for the impossible and they kept getting up no matter how bad they got
beaten down time and time again this is a common an underdog Trope in itself and
is not out of place among contemporary pop culture however as Aaron became a
more pivotal figure to the survey corps victories even though Aaron himself was
often ancillary many within the survey corps and parody as a whole come to
venerate him and his agenda just as season 4 doubles down on fascistic
undertones it perhaps begins to explore the finer points of fishistic ideology
within fascism there is typically a belief that death is the most significant
contribution that one can make to society which has brought up multiple times
throughout seasons one two and three in many fascist states there is a warrior
mythology around seeking out a worthy death a worthy death is almost always a
death which is of assistance to the reigning leadership this is a component of
why white nationalists often lean into Norse mythology as it goes entry into
Valhalla is earned through A Warrior's death dying in battle the most common way
to die in battle was to be in an army this isn't to say that all Nordic culture
itself was fascist the concept of a good death was a religious one that spanned
across the whole culture rather than in service to a single ruler that isn't to
say that rulers would not exploit this but the purpose of a good death was
intrinsic rather than appealing to a concept of the greater good rhetoric around
the greater good itself is a pivotal element of Attack on Titan and especially
in season 4 we see otherwise identifiable characters committing atrocities in
the name of the greater good such as the once relatively innocent Arman Aaron
himself befits a mythological Warrior status a figure who is seemingly
Supernatural powers and whose objectives are unwaveringly aligned with the
defense or expansion of the Homeland the warrior must possess the
characteristics that the state wants the collective to embody however the
discourse on deathworthiness is not limited to one side of this fictional
conflict and an interpretation of Aaron depends on whether the series is
depicting him sympathetically or critically some may interpret Aaron as a heroic
figure who is making the tough but necessary decision to do what needs to be
done some interpret him as a national figure who is returning A persecuted
Nation to its former glory to others he is super Hitler these viewpoints are
represented by different characters in the story and they can be found on very
different sides of the conflict but there's very little framing to moralize this
specifically it seems to be taken for granted that Aaron's actions are evil or
necessary while Aaron himself is fascist coded and while his cult the jagerists
are brazenly Fascist does that mean the show itself is fascist Aaron was after
all the POV character who is more or less the audience's cipher for the
beginning of the series but it's important to remember that the protagonist of a
story is not necessarily the hero literally speaking a protagonist is simply the
character For Whom The Narrative follows given that Aaron is committing a
literal genocide I think it's safe to reason that he is the series's principal
villain this narrative device isn't uncommon a hero who uses their power to
become a monster is a plot device from Frank Herbert's Dune it's present in the
Star Wars prequels and can even be seen in ancient myths like Heracles when
gauging weather Attack on Titan itself is fascist it comes down to how these
characters are framed and the consensus in Attack on Titan from literally every
other main character is that Aaron maybe needs to chill bearing in mind that
detractors of the series point out that the principal characters of Armin and
Mikasa Aaron's childhood friends attempt to justify his actions at the end of
the series that said we don't have to look at them as heroic either Armin had
been dropping fascist adjacent Lions since season one monsters we have to
abandon our Humanity which itself almost sounds like a direct quote from a beer
hall speech and Mikasa is so obsessed with Aaron to the point of being
completely incapable of escaping him at the end of the manga isayama punctuated
that by having a bird land on her shoulder and lift her scarf over her neck
Justice Aaron said he would always be there to do she is trapped for the rest of
her life by the very memory of him that should not excuse these characters for
sure they are letting personal feelings Cloud their judgment of someone who is
very obviously willing and able to commit genocide with so many main characters
joining into these sentiments which if they are not fascists they are certainly
violent ones does the audience have a character with whom their viewpoints are
meant to be reflected except maybe Jean he doesn't really do anything horrible
during the series even Historia while inclined towards acts of kindness is
indicative of the rightful ruler Trope in fiction which ends up itself amounting
to royalist propaganda and while fascism is not defined by the lack of democracy
monarchy and oligarchy aren't really that much better and while the day is saved
from the bad Monarch a good Monarch is still totalitarian nevertheless how do we
read that how do we read any of this because especially when it comes to the
aforementioned fascistic coating there seems to be no clear pattern for how
these coded messages play out in the plot sometimes a character's death yields
opportunity other times it's just a pointless Slaughter sometimes military
decorum and discipline holds the line and keeps the group together other times
it functions as cultish indoctrination these themes are so fast and loose in the
series that I can see the evidence for where some people could read it as
fascist and others could read it as specifically anti-fascist and it's not like
fascist-esque imagery and Anime and manga is rare on the subject anime YouTuber
Joe Yang said it's important to note that the use of fascistic war or even Nazi
imagery is not necessarily an endorsement of these ideas or regimes as strange
as it may sound the fascist and anti-semitic elements in Attack on Titan
shouldn't be controversial to bring up the question the audience and the critics
need to answer is whether or not the series is actively harmful because of them
that is whether the audience is directed to sympathize with characters and
themes that represent and are represented by these elements some media
commentators even admitted to not watching Attack on Titan because they were
afraid of the backlash they would receive for discussing the show's political
undertones YouTuber Jeff THU argues it's because this discussion keeps happening
but it's also not there's some really good criticism of Attack on Titan and I
think it's important to criticize it but a lot of people come at it strong and
condemn it that does as much to kill the conversation as people being like shut
the hell up about politics because it reinforces the argument that people are
just trying to cancel this good show that you like for a long time anime fans
had no way of knowing what their favorite writers and artists even looked like
let alone what they thought about the world anime fans have generally avoided
discussing the political content of their favorite shows because the art form
was until recently a niche that was sometimes wrongly characterized as being
obscene and dangerous given the cultural status in Japan of Animation as a
medium and not a genre there are venues for animation to receive prestigious
Acclaim that is typically denied to animation in America the equivalent of
rejecting all anime due to sweeping generalizations is like shunning all
live-action movies because porn is also live action Andrea horbinski a scholar
with a doctorate in New Media studies in history said some anglophone and
American anime fans say that politics in anime is too foreign to comprehend a
lot more people these days seem to have some accurate knowledge about the
socio-cultural politics in Japan but in my experience they're equally likely to
combine a dollop of knowledge about current circumstances in Japan with their
own preconceptions about Japan and Japanese Society ironically while it's never
been easier to access cultural and political discussions directly from Japan
thanks to the internet relying on their own preconceptions and only taking on
board information that supports them definitely does keep anime fans in this
position from appreciating the range of views in anime generally this may color
certain anime viewers perceptions of shows with feminist or queer themes as well
as shows like Attack on Titan right-wing anime viewers according to herbinsky
demand the inclusion of western-style political themes as they put it these fans
insist that feminism and lgbtq people don't exist in Japan and that any anime
depicting either is woke garbage or similar these fans are extremely angry at
attempts to discussion addictions of female characters in anime as something
that could often use Improvement or the inclusion of LGBT characters period they
may cite evidence to support their views that is wholly out of context attempts
by Japanese feminists and lgbtq activists to provide corrective information
online do not go down well particularly on Twitter which is funny because these
kinds of regressionists Praise anime for its narrative complexity but at the
same time deny the presence of political complexity at least when it's politics
that challenges their preconceptions again we're in a situation where media
being political only really applies to media that promotes opinions outside the
viewer's comfort zone regardless if that media as Attack on Titan does borrows
heavily from Real World politics and historical references there is a contingent
of the audience who is so over accustomed to having their viewpoints
unchallenged that they will default to an assumption that the media they enjoy
is simple and uncomplicated but the question remains does media owe you
simplicity huh why am I suddenly wearing different clothes and in a whole other
setting for part four that seems a bit jarring doesn't it oh well you can't
really say that attack on Titan is overly simple or about nothing there are
innumerous instances where characters go out of their way to specifically
outline what the audience should be taking away from a given Arc at least in the
English dub which may not be the best way to convey messaging across to your
audience if you treat people like they're too dumb to pick up on what's going on
they won't develop the tools needed to read into messaging in other media people
become how you treat them which in itself could be a theme within Attack on
Titan ironically probably the greatest challenge in the field of literary
analysis is how to gauge whether there even is intended subtext in a literary
work and this isn't necessarily limited to genre either Jane Austen wrote what
is ostensibly Chiclet in terms of plot beats and characters however it is fairly
clear in her work that she was very consciously writing commentary and criticism
of the English Gentry sometimes there is social commentary that is overlooked
because of genre take Edgar Allan Poe for instance who during his lifetime was
dismissed by American literary canon for writing Gothic horror pulp the gothic
genre was seen as being far too rooted in sensationalist European sensibilities
and at the time the American literary scene was rooted in the idea that to be
legitimate one must be as serious and boring as possible indeed Poe had an avid
French fan base and was a significant source of inspiration for Jules Verne
relocation to Europe may have turned him into a respected author instead Poe
remained in America and died nearly destitute apologizing for being such a bad
writer and it was not until another generation rediscovered his work and began
to see a great deal of poignant and relevant commentary within it the same could
be said of Stan Lee who longed to write the Great American novel while comic
books are often criticized by literary Scholars as barely more valuable than the
pulp that they're historically printed on it was not until the end of his life
that Lee realized that through his contributions to Marvel Spider-Man in
particular he had created a significant contribution to American Literature
generally speaking though anytime it comes to populous media that is media that
is popular there is a tendency among the media Illuminati to dismiss it the
thought process being if many people see the value of this media then it must be
relying on Cheap Thrills to collect its audience yes because Homer rhyming off
the ancestors of Rich patrons reimagined as Heroes of the Trojan War is
absolutely not that however it can also work the opposite way where audiences
learned Scholars especially can read meaning into something where it was not
intended does Homer's wine dark sea actually function as a grand and poetic
description of the sea in a particular light or is it just something he had to
throw in to flush out the extra syllable to keep up the meter unfortunately it's
difficult to really gauge instances of this oftentimes authors are open about
fans reading unintended meanings into their books though will welcome the
additional analysis artists themselves exist in this world and there are any
number of unknown biases they may manifest in their work it's unlikely for
instance that Stephanie Meyer a Mormon intended to write a book about a girl who
has sex once gets pregnant and dies but here we are but in many cases I can see
authors leaning into unintended analysis of their media whether it's
subliminally or not it came from them so they can take the credit suffice to say
it's almost unheard of that the creator of a celebrated and acclaimed work of
academic art will come forward and say you're full of [ __ ] almost unheard of
for those of you who have endured an English Lit 101 class or did any kind of
digging into modernist poetry you've probably heard of earn Mali with classic
lines such as I am still the Black Swan of trespass on alien Waters that
rabbit's foot I carried in my left pocket has worn a hemorrhage in the lining
the pond lilies could not stifle the green Descent of frogs sounds deep right
for a very brief time earn mali's poems were the toast of Australian modernism
however there was a problem earn Mali didn't exist the radical shifting
landscape of art and culture after the first world war gave rise to different
artistic movements and while these new formats were embraced quite widely not
everyone was on board enter Australian writers James McCauley and Harold Stewart
who set out to prove that all this new poetry was Much Ado About Nothing they
edited a couple of existing poems and wrote a couple of new ones to be what they
consider to be bad writing and developed a tragic backstory for the late Ern
Mali and mailed off the poems but even after they were revealed to be a hoax
earn Mali remained a celebrity poet even though people knew he was fake poets
especially in America and England believe that Stuart and McCauley had
outsmarted themselves and that in the process of trying to create nonsense they
somehow managed to reach down and tap into true genius genius that they never
could reach in their own poetry in other words imagine your head is so far up
your ass that you would literally rather claim that your pranker is too stupid
to write bad poetry then admit that you suck at analyzing it but am I saying
that attack on Titan is a modern day urn Mali no because from what we can gather
about it it's not trying to troll conventions in manga or anime it's very
earnestly trying to talk about trauma grief group think war and terrorism the
series will very deliberately orate what a viewer could simply observe the
series very much wants you to know that it's talking about specific things to
the point of coming out and just telling you this happens so often I think that
if the series was trying to make a statement about fascism and Military culture
it would have the characters actively engage in that discussion analyzing
literature is about looking for patterns and this is clearly the pattern that
attack on Titan uses but when it comes to everything else that isn't directly
stated see the relevance of the urn Mali hoax doesn't just demonstrate that it
is possible to convince an audience to read meaning into nonsense The hoax shows
us that if an audience already believes there is meaning in a piece of media
there is little to nothing that can be done to convince them that the meaning
they read into it isn't there this fascist messaging in Attack on Titan almost
exclusively is presented in visual cues but isayama was horribly critical of his
own artistic abilities and may have simply borrowed the established fascist
looks instead of creating his own so other than that what's specifically about
Attack on Titan implores the audience to feel that there's anything that needs
to be read into it in the first place why read into this media in a way that you
would not look at what we do in the shadows as a complex commentary about
generational gaslighting entitlement and exploitation why do we look at one and
say no that's just pansexual vampires and then go to such lengths to justify a
fascist or non-fascist reading of the other I spoke about this before but
tragedy is almost universally held up as Superior forms of dramatic expression
next to Comedy this is almost entirely thanks to writings by Aristotle who felt
the drama was super carrier because it had the emotional ammunition capable of
imparting political and social messages onto the audience some may call that
propaganda but they risk having a black bag pulled over their head by the hit
squad of academics and taken away into an unmarked van so we're not going to say
that because I have more to do my simple rationale for why people may
specifically Scholars and intellectuals hold drama to be so significant is
because smart people tend to be sad it's a dull cruel world when you can
rationalize all the ways that Society is constructed to beat you down defaulting
to the self-evident truth that life is suffering we hold media that reflects
this suffering to be closer to a truth about The Human Experience a simpler
assessment would be the tragic media is emotionally exhausting to see your
Heroes best laid plans fail and to see beloved characters meet their end and to
see possibly hours of emotional investment end in sadness this takes its toll
perhaps we feel the need to read meaning into these things to justify the
emotional fatigue an attack on Titan is certainly emotionally draining entire
episode arcs are spent to establish characters and within minutes not only are
they devoured alive but they are denied any satisfaction or dignity Time After
Time After Time plans fail Heroes fall and good people have everything taken
away from them even victories in Attack on Titan feel hollow and disappointing
everything is so gratuitously Bleak that at times it reaches this kind of Lemony
Snicket absurdity where anything that could possibly go wrong somehow does go
wrong where the plot is Twisted to scrape every shred of dignity away from these
characters who fought for the greater good tragedy and heartbreak seem to be the
only narrative beat it's willing to explore for the first three seasons the day
is only really saved because the main characters fail upwards almost by accident
for all the secret hidden abilities enemies have there's almost always a trump
card that the heroes couldn't have possibly foreseen resulting in a lot of dead
secondary characters in fact it's not until the fourth season where we see the
main characters essentially framed as the villains that they become competent
and that their plans are successful the series does have a pattern of characters
becoming alarmingly competent and Death Proof the second they become villains
these tragedies implore us to feel that there must be something to be said about
it that the audience is being pulled through this bleakness in order to get some
kind of human truth out of it or is tragedy using trauma in the way that comedy
use is levity that the dying and the suffering are merely present to give the
audience an outlet and keep them engaged in the series Attack on Titan presents
the message that war is senseless and has no meaning this is something the
characters actually do talk about however if we try to extract meaning from this
conflict when we are told that conflict is meaningless are we not giving meaning
to those fictional tragedies and if we can read meaning into fictitious War
what's stopping us from Reading meaning into actual meaningless War there is a
lot of stuff in Attack on Titan and yes there is the possibility that it's not
saying anything at all beyond the textual messaging of war is bad but when it
comes to the rampant discourse about whether this media supports fascist
ideology or whether it's subverting it there's a lot of strong evidence to point
in either direction as we've discussed the problem here is that messaging is
broadly applied and that there seems to be multiple different interpretations of
each character event and symbol the LDN people contain elements of a Jewish
analogy as per the Discrimination they face in Marley and the rhetoric around
being the chosen people of God however if Marley is seen as a Third Reich
analogy then the Nazis never used Elite Jewish combat units nor was there any
widespread success at fostering a sense of internalized self-loathing amongst
the Jewish people they were meant to be removed from Aryan Society not give any
use and even made honorary Aryans like eldians can be made honorary Marlins by
becoming one of the nine Elite Titans conversely if eldians living in Marley are
meant to be Jewish then what are parodiesian eldians meant to be if parody was
meant to be an allegorical ghetto then how does that symbol function when we are
exposed to literal ghettos at the end of season 3 is parody a ghetto or is it
Israel you can make that argument but it also falls apart pretty quickly because
you don't have foreign Jews trying to come kill Israelis it's either an
incredibly messy allegory or it's not an allegory at all the problem with any
reading of Attack on Titan is allegory itself there's no clear one-to-one
comparison any comparison that can be drawn has counter evidence but just
because there isn't any clear messaging through allegory symbolism nor illusion
does that mean there is no messaging at all as it happens there is an
alternative to allegory and that is the much less commonly employed
applicability which is the driving force behind none other than the Lord of the
Rings author J.R.R Tolkien developed the Lord of the Rings as a substitution for
the English mythology that was erased during the Norman occupation of Great
Britain in 1066. during this period through the 11th century Invaders from what
is modern day friends brought an end to what was the Anglo-Saxon era of England
come to think of it even this could be read as an allegory for attack on Titan
an island nation dominated by a foreign Continental power that shook off its
oppressors to then go on and conquer the entire world so maybe Aaron is actually
King George III anyway this period of British history was marked by a cultural
adjustment away from the local Germanic and Pagan roots of the Island's
post-roman Independence this included not only the introduction of Latin and
Greek grammatical conventions into a Germanic language system if you ever
wondered why English has so many silent letters this is why but the complete
Erasure of English mythological cycles pre-norm and English Heroes of myth would
have resembled a cross between the Germanic likes of Siegfried and the Celtic
likes of kukalan Beowulf was one of these figures but is believed to be a later
Edition and far from the only one instead the Normans replace that with French
derivative Heroes like King Arthur Tolkien was not at all a fan of this and his
creation of Middle Earth was developed over a lifetime of researching scraps of
surviving documents relics and anthropological discoveries the objective was to
create the closest approximation to a mythological cycle that would not have
felt out of place among the Anglo-Saxons famously Tolkien loathed the concept of
allegory I can imagine he felt it was a cheap way to beat direct moral messages
into the readers cordially dislike allegory and all its manifestations and
always have done so since I grew old and worry enough to detect its presence I
much prefer history true or famed with its varied applicability to the thought s
readers I think that many confuse applicability with with allegory but the one
resides in the freedom of the reader and the other in the purposed domination of
the author and compared to his contemporaries he wasn't altogether wrong C.S
Lewis a good friend of his by contrast was going to personally come to your
house and beat your parents with a cricket bat if you didn't understand that the
lion is literally Jesus allegory is closed off this fake thing is this real
thing in the case of allegory there is an intended meaning and there are wrong
interpretations furthermore if allegory is referencing something specific then
there is a point at which this media loses its relevance or when people start
interpreting it the wrong way look at the Book of Revelations which is not
prophesying the end of the world it's prophesying the fall of the Roman Empire
which was currently taking place upon its writing suffice to say if a myth does
not speak to the ongoing culture of a Nation then it is not a myth that will be
remembered because the nation cannot continue using it for a sense of ongoing
cultural identity and tolkien's going to roll over in his grave when I say this
but there are allegorical parallels between Middle Earth and the United Kingdom
of the early 20th century first of all it's shaped like whales for starters
there's also strong overtones of axis themed villains and allusions to
environmental destroying industrialization of the blackened land in the
Southeast Tolkien existed within the culture of the day so it's nearly
impossible for him to not draw inspiration from Real World events aware or not
however these are details that aren't crucial to the plot but the symbols the
plot does revolve around were intendedly Universal and intendedly vague the most
famous among them is the One Ring itself many felt that it was an allegory for
the nuclear bomb which frustrated Tolkien to no end others felt it could be
wealth influence drugs politics power or even the temptation of power it's all
of these things and none of them what the ring represents is something much
closer to a human Universal the ring represents something that is Coveted and
coveted for different reasons it can't be a bomb or a weapon because it does not
give total power to all those who use it it can't be wealth because it has no
utility it can't be power because its users are not invulnerable it can't be a
drug because drugs don't make you functionally immortal talking about what the
One Ring could be is a video all on its own but it's a symbol that speaks to the
cyclical corrupting elements that reside in all people that not one person is
invulnerable to the Ring's call whether they have the ability to use it or not
applicability helps the Lord of the Rings function as a retroactive mythology
because the pivotal symbols can be reapplied to as many circumstances as needed
there will always be an analogy for the One Ring because there is always
something that will corrupt even the best of us even if the thing changes over
time and from culture to culture but is this what's going on in Attack on Titan
and if it is what is being made applicable there are direct allegories to real
world events such as the ghettos and the armbands but are these meant to be
symbols that draw the audience's attention to whatever the applicability is bear
in mind that the running of internment camps was not limited to Germans and here
in North America both Canadian and American internal security push Japanese
people into camps just like these are the allusions to Jewish ghettos meant to
implore the audience to observe this kind of ethnic persecution rather than
being a specific reference to the Holocaust and instead the aldians can possibly
represent persecuted people of all types rather than specifically European Jews
and especially when you begin to broaden the definition of internment camps in
the imagery of ghettos to a broader sense of ethnic isolation this theme could
also include native internment during colonial periods and later reservations
and residential schools but there is a great deal of debate in literary
criticism if characters in fiction can function as symbols at all after all the
more a character needs to function as a symbol the less agency they appear to
have can a fictional ethnic group appropriately function as a symbol especially
provided that the ethnic group in question actually does the thing that their
persecutors use to justify their institutional discrimination one of them does
try to use the power of the Titans to destroy the world other applicable symbols
such as totalitarian rule militarization despotism sacrifice propaganda humanity
and consumption again are moralized contextually these are Concepts and themes
not necessarily symbols but applicable nevertheless hell the imagery of fascism
itself falls under applicability when we think of soldiers Goose stepping down a
street our brains immediately go to the German fascists but look at the Soviets
the Chinese the North Koreans these countries adopted the look and pomp of Nazi
fascism for their own brand because it worked but those are all examples of bad
things problem with applicability and Attack on Titan is that these applicable
concepts are good and or bad depending on the circumstance applicability
functions so well in The Lord of the Rings because the moralization around the
applied symbol is universal the ring is always bad and those who intend to use
it for good either become bad or have a very selfish definition of what good is
if you use ultimate power to bring about world peace you still have a lot of
ultimate power left over just lying around those that want the Ring's power
cannot be trusted with it and those who do not want the Ring's power aren't
immune to it either one could argue that the same line of thinking can be
applied to the power of the Titans that even under the best intentions those
with the power of the nine universally Resort to evil and that Aaron and Zeke
especially fall prey to the godly power of the founding Titan but Zeke and Aaron
were flawed from the beginning and they had intentions for the power of the
founder even before they had a plan to use it furthermore Aaron had the power of
the founding Titan for almost the entire duration of the series and yet his
personality made no shift from before and after he received it even his ability
to transform into the attack Titan did not corrupt him and he used both the
attack Titan and the founding Titan to help the civilians and soldiers of
parodies survived the Titan Onslaught applicability in Attack on Titan loses a
lot of the Finesse in nuances meant to drive drama in the plot even once held
truths of Titan's bad is turned on its head when the Gallant Heroes learned that
Titans are or once were humans which does fit into a rhetoric around
militarization practices where soldiers are conditioned to see the enemy as
sub-human between seasons 1 2 and the first half of season 3 Titans themselves
function as an incredibly applicable symbol for instance I first read the Titans
as a symbol for capitalist hoarding you have a collection of large people in
differently consuming everything without discrimination it's not a stretch to
see this as a criticism for a handful of aged capitalists hoarding an abundance
of wealth and making life miserable for everybody else the small people do their
best to resist but most will be consumed regardless especially since this media
was developed by someone who lived through the Japanese depression of the 1990s
there is contextual evidence to support this but there are other readings of
them such as the aforementioned dehumanized militant enemy but they could also
refer to the process of gentrification as they seek to push locals out of their
communities or even the military powers of Asia such as China that bear down on
the relatively militarily weak Japan so they could mean anything you want them
to mean even if we can dig through the source material to find scraps of meaning
that point one way or the other is there any way to actually discern what
intended meaning if any there was take the aforementioned quote from Hajime
asiyama being a writer I believe it is impolite to instruct your readers the way
of how to read your story ice I spend a lot of time following movie creators
press tours commentaries interviews take the simplest slasher movie and fans and
interviewers will inquire as to what possible interpretations were intended
filmmakers especially get a particular kind of question is your Blockbuster
movie about X the answer almost always runs along the lines of being reluctant
to tell Their audience how to watch their movie in some instances yes there is a
deliberate social commentary scream highlights the facade of suburban safety and
comfort alien speaks to the threat of venereal infection in a society that had
abandoned condoms for the pill but a lot of the time filmmakers just want to
make a fun movie it's inevitable as mentioned for real world events to inspire
plot beats but that doesn't mean that social commentary is what the movie is for
believe it or not but most entertainers just want to entertain that isn't to say
they aren't methodical insightful or elegant people it just means that sometimes
they just want to push the boundaries of how many ways they can use artificial
blood provided that isayama offered a similar answer about art being in the eye
of the beholder maybe all the tragedy and militarism and Attack on Titan is just
meant for spectacle maybe all the imagery is meant to have no deeper
significance than to set the stage for a world that only really seems to
function because of war and to allow the audience to understand how these
characters interact with trauma the way they do maybe there is no statement
about the nature of military regime Doctrine and the manifestations of Martial
law maybe it's just about a bunch of sad people who don't know anything but War
because that's what they grew up in that doesn't mean Attack on Titan has no
value with or without fascistic messaging there are plenty of reasons to like it
and there are plenty of reasons to dislike it personal taste is enough of a
justification media needs to neither be grand nor demonic to facilitate an
opinion you don't need to dig into the subtext to either hail it as genius or
the root of all evil being entertaining is enough and I feel that the divisive
nature of this anime results from people having a conflict over messaging that
may or may not even be there to justify that their interpretation is the correct
one and that if everyone else could just see like they do it would either be the
Masterpiece or Pariah that it ought to be arguing that it's the greatest piece
of art ever created or the most destructive or two extremes that refuse to see
the Shades of Gray in between Attack on Titan is good because I say so attack on
Titan is dangerous because I say so all eldians are evil because I say so all
Marlins are evil because I say so we don't live in a black and white world of
perfection and inferiority where nothing is okay where things can only be great
or horrible in this world good and evil rarely exist as absolutes a world of
absolutes can't really exist the only truly absolute thing is death itself which
a component of fascist ideology is this Cult of death that how one dies is more
significant than how one lives perhaps all these characters are meant to be
cautionary tales so many of them let single-minded Devotion to the greater good
lead them to their deaths and in that process did they ever truly live were they
ever truly free death as an absolute shouldn't lock us into fatalistic paths but
should allow us to realize what freedoms we do have while we are alive if death
is the absolute then all other things exist as nuances in Shades of Gray
ascribing absolute values of good or evil is to reject the range of experience
that life has to offer the more we cling to absolutes in anything in life the
more we can sign ourselves to a path with no way to turn around or change course
that's what Aaron did he decided that the greater good was worth trapping
himself on a doomed road that would only end in his premature death that's what
hatred does to people hatred traps you hatred removes your options hatred takes
away your freedom and it tricks you into thinking those you hate are the ones
who have taken your freedom away and like the characters in Attack on Titan we
exist in a world so full of hatred that it's hard not to get mired in it
sometimes it's our job to reject hate and those who propagate it not to hate
them in return but to pity them they've let their intolerance control their
lives don't let it control yours fly free and when the fascists and bigots and
hate mongers of the world try to demonize you know that it's because they see
your freedom they see you being yourself not trapped inside a cage and they hate
that you can be free and they can't you have strength they can't even imagine
and it horrifies them because there is nothing more horrifying to a fascist than
someone they hate who refuses to die [Music] [Music] foreign [Music] [Music]
thank you [Music] [Music] thank you [Music] thank you [Music] eyes [Music]