---
date: 2018-06-30
title: Harry Potter and The Closet Under The Stairs #- Queer themes in Harry Potter (Video essay)
status: Auto
aka: !!seq
  - "Queer themes in Harry Potter (Video essay)" # for ui length
topics: !!seq
  - "Harry Potter"
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
description: "a video essay on <xyz>."

cite:
  clips: !!map
  yikes: !!map
  misinformation: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
it could be said that I'm a bit of a Harry Potter fan I jumped onto the series
when I was 12 just after coming out yes I came out that young which was also
just after the release of Goblet of Fire I devoured the first four books between
September and November of 2001 just in time for Harry Potter and the
Philosopher's Stone to hit theaters since then I've watched every movie too many
times to count and I reread the entire series at least once a year it's a bit of
a tradition for me at this point I also have the audiobooks read by Stephen Fry
and listen to them every night as I go to sleep they're like ASMR for me so
maybe I'm more than just a bit of a Harry Potter fan it eats at me every day
that I haven't gotten to go to the Wizarding World of Harry Potter at Universal
Studios yet someday so growing up gay during the years at the Bush
administration JK Rowling's books were a bit of a respite for me a place I could
return to when the real world bigots became too much to handle it was a place
where wizards of all races and backgrounds intermingled in the same school and
were the characters who hate muggles were obviously the villains there was no
looking at it from both sides arguments in Harry Potter like there was on CNN
Baltimore hated muggles and mud Bloods and he was the bad guy Republicans hated
gay people but that was their quote religious freedom so it was a bit of a shock
to me when I started seeing people online call out JK Rowling for being
homophobic or at the very least being supportive of gay erasure the controversy
over Dumbledore's gayness and whether or not it would exist in the new Fantastic
beast films was getting some people a little tilted the fervor is died down for
the moment but I'm sure it'll be back up in full swing by the time the release
of fantastic beasts the crimes of Grindelwald comes around in November so I
decided to take this time to look at the world that JK Rowling created the
characters that inhabit it and see what gayness I could gleam from it to answer
the question of why was I a newly out gay kid so completely obsessed with Harry
Potter when there was an area gay character to be seen what did I find so
appealing about the Boy Who Lived besides that [Music] Harry Potter in the
Philosopher's Stone was first published in June of 1997 and begun the story of
Harry Potter a child wizard who was orphaned when his parents James and Lily
were murdered by Lord Voldemort Harry is sent to live with his muggle hot and
uncle on his mother's side the Dursleys the Dursleys are completely aware of
Harry's Wizarding lineage and here is where the comparison to growing up gay
begins many times gay children are completely unaware that they're gay they
don't feel attraction to people of the same sex yet and even though they may
have characteristics that don't perfectly align with the gender norms girls that
are tom boys and boys that are [ __ ] boys they don't feel any different from
anyone else most of the time but sometimes the adults in their lives pick up on
these characteristics especially with little boys a boy who likes playing with
dolls prefers disney princesses to transformers or likes to wear the color pink
might be made fun of by his peers even by adults his own family might punish him
for liking these things not allowing him to play with girls refusing to buy him
toys or clothing that could in any way be construed as feminine the child is
made to feel ashamed of what they like the adults in their life are shaming them
for being who they are which it was I was the only one to see her for what she
was and then she had you when I knew he would be the same just strange justice
abnormal they know that Harry is likely a wizard especially when odd happenings
begin to take place in his early childhood things that the Dursleys immediately
spot as magic even when Harry's a baby to put a stop to it they lied to him
about his family telling him that his parents had died in a car crash and that
the lightning bolts scar on his head was also a result of said crash they
wouldn't allow him to see pictures of his parents and even hid his existence
from others by having him live in a cupboard under the stairs stashing him there
or whenever they had company it's not a far stretch to see Harry's near
imprisonment in the cupboard as being trapped in a closet the Dursleys also made
sure to have no pictures of Harry around the house he was made to feel shame by
the Dursleys and everyone in their orbit for something he didn't understand
something he didn't even know he was this happens a lot - gage hildren
especially in particularly religious families pray away the gay cams regularly
have prepubescent children admitted by parents who think they might possibly
maybe could be gay need to put a stop to it before they realize it for
themselves create the shame that will if not actually cure it it doesn't at
least stop the child from eventually acting on their urges and so Vernon and
petunia Dursley did everything they could to keep Harry ignorant of his true
heritage to make sure he stayed in the closet so this week they took
particularly drastic action when Harry begun receiving invitations to join other
people like him the Dursleys especially Vernon who had a particular hatred of
anything not quote normal wouldn't let Harry even leave the house eventually
they stowed Harry away on a rock in the sea quite literally in the middle of
nowhere but try as they might Harry could not be kept in the closet with the
help of Rubeus Hagrid Harry was ushered into the Wizarding World how did he
enter the Wizarding World well the same way a lot of gay people enter the gay
world for the first time via a bar a bar that on the outside seems nondescript
enough but the inside is populated by people the outside world would not accept
remember Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone was written in the early 90s
at the height of the AIDS crisis being gay was still very behind the counter and
a nondescript paper bag secret quiet something you didn't necessarily broadcast
to the world many gay men and women at the time never met another gay person
until they went to a gay bar and that's what Harry Potter does he enters the
leaky cauldron and is exposed to a magical world he had no idea existed not to
mention he joins this world by being brought into the back room with a big hairy
guy but we won't talk about that when harry enters the magical world he meets
any number of new people who are just like him people his own age who he learns
things alongside of people younger than him who would idolize him and eccentric
older mentor figures that look out for him a lot like the gay community of the
early 90s there was no protection for sexual orientation in England until 2003
so at the time of Harry Potter's writing you still had to keep your gayness
hidden for the most part unless you wanted to run the risk of being outed and
possibly losing your job your family your friends everything and so gay men and
women created their own social networks their own support networks to help each
other through the tough times separated from the quote normal world or as
Rowling would put at the muggle world in the 1980s the Thatcher government was
almost as hesitant as the Reagan government to acknowledge the AIDS epidemic as
people drop dead from this blood-borne plague Thatcher and Reagan went about
their lives business as usual much like how the Ministry of Magic refused to
acknowledge the return of Voldemort until they simply could not turn a blind eye
anymore it's bad and much like in the real world it was too late the damage had
been done people were dead and more were dying every day both wizards and
muggles alike fell at the hand of Voldemort gay people and stray people both
died from a disease that could have possibly been slowed down if not stopped if
only the government had cared enough there actually is a direct allegory for
aids in the Harry Potter books and that is lycanthropy or being a werewolf a
condition thrust upon Remus Lupin at a young age when he was attacked by Fenrir
Greyback non too subtle rape allegory Remus was terrified to disclose his
condition to his friends and did everything he could to hide it from them much
like many gay men in the 1980s who were diagnosed with HIV Rowling herself
confirmed the allegorical meaning of lycanthropy in her ebook short stories from
Hogwarts of heroism hardship and dangerous hobbies released in 2016 not
everything gay related in Harry Potter is allegory though some things are
actually written in the text themselves such as the relationship between
Dumbledore and Gellert Grindelwald the story of the two men is told in pieces in
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hollows after Dumbledore's death in the sixth novel
a salacious in-universe biography of Dumbledore is published the life and lies
of Albus Dumbledore by Rita Skeeter in this book it is revealed that Dumbledore
had a very close relationship with Gellert Grindelwald who would go on to become
the equivalent of wizard Hitler in the book this is the biggest controversy
which turns out to be pretty accurate right down to Dumbledore refusing to stop
his old friend even as he murdered his way across Europe during the years of
world war ii though the two did eventually faceoff with Dumbledore winning in
Grindelwald being locked away until his death at the hands of Valda Mort in 1998
but the real controversy sprung up in the real world when JK Rowling was asked
if Albus Dumbledore had ever known true love Rowling stated that Dumbledore was
in fact gay and over time went into some detail in regard to his love for
Grindelwald as a young man a love and infatuation that lasted well into
adulthood she has said that the feelings were not entirely mutual and the
Grindelwald may have been using Dumbledore's love for him to control the young
wizard other theories say that the feelings were mutual but the Grindelwald lust
for power was greater than his love for Dumbledore the pair split after the
death of Dumbledore's younger sister Ariana a death that Dumbledore blamed
himself for this trauma on top being so tragically betrayed by Grindelwald led
to Dumbledore becoming as Rowling put it quite asexual between 1945 and his
death in 1997 Dumbledore did not take any lovers as far as we know so though he
is confirmed to be gay he may have only ever actually loved one man many
straight fans felt betrayed that the Dumbledore they grew up with thinking was
straight was suddenly gay ah you have inserted politics into my children's novel
and many gay fans felt betrayed the Dumbledore sexuality was never actually
stated outright in the books the betrayal of gay fans was compounded when
Dumbledore was announced to be a leading character in the new series of
fantastic beasts movies but director David Yates stated that they will not
explicitly mention Dumbledore sexuality in the second film the crimes of
Grindelwald some fans took this to mean it would never be addressed in the five
film series others like myself are willing to give it a bit more breathing room
especially since there was already a lot of homoeroticism in the first fantastic
peace movie in fantastic beasts and where to find them Grindelwald has taken on
the guise of Percival graves and infiltrated the makuu's ax or the magical
Congress of the United States of America to hunt down an obscure e 'l an
extremely powerful young wizard whose magic is literally exploding out of them
due to it being suppressed he recruits credence played by out actor Azra miller
to help him track it down their relationship is more than just a little close do
you think I'm a freak No I think you're a very special young man or I wouldn't
have asked you to help me now would I I want you to have this credence I would
trust very few with it very soon with you you different watching it it's quite
easy to see the Grindelwald is doing exactly the Creedence what he did to
Dumbledore decades before creating an emotional connection with the fragile
young man using him and then dropping him as soon as he appears to no longer be
useful as it turns out Creedence himself was the obscure and in the end of the
film Grindelwald is so distraught at his apparent demise at the hands of the
Makua that he begins to lose control of his disguise eventually being discovered
and arrested the relationship between credence and Grindelwald isn't exactly
subtle in the film you'd have to try pretty hard to ignore the homosexual
undertones between the two characters I read this as Rowling who wrote the
screenplay laying the groundwork for more overt homosexual themes in later films
ensuring that the audience would allow her to tell the story of Grindelwald and
Dumbledore properly without straight washing it that's how I read it but maybe
I'm being optimistic we'll see this November when the crimes of Grindelwald is
released and finally there's the issue of Harry Potter and the cursed child and
the gay love affair between Albus Potter and Scorpius Malfoy that never was but
I think that's a whole other video so what do you think about the gay themes in
the Harry Potter universe do you think Rowling Yates and Warner Brothers will
actually show Dumbledore's gayness in the upcoming movies or will he be straight
washed let me know in the comments below don't forget to Like and subscribe and
if you've got some sickles nuts or even galleons burning a hole in your pocket
check out my patreon in the description below you can vote on which videos I do
next and even suggest ones you'd like to see you have no idea how much I would
appreciate it so until next time my fellow witches and wizards mischief managed
[Music] [Applause] [Music] you