---
date: 2021-05-12
title: An Over-Emotional Look at Why JK Rowling is Bad
status: Script
aka: !!seq
topics: !!seq
  - "Harry Potter"
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
description: "a video essay on <xyz>."
notes: [^odd-linebreaks]

cite:
  clips: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
“Ms. Rowling of Edinburgh Scotland was proud

to say that she was a TERF, thank you very much”. *Sigh* PART ONE: The
Philosopher’s Denial So here we are. Honestly didn’t think I’d end up making

this video. In fact I said in a few livestreams that I

wouldn’t. But it’s just been nagging and nagging at

me. I’d made my video about queer themes in

Harry Potter back in 2018, the halcyon days of when you could give Joanne
Rowling the

benefit of the doubt. And boy did I ever give her the benefit of

the doubt. And why wouldn’t I? She was a powerful female author who used

her voice to raise money for charity and vocally support marginalized
communities. Crimes of Grinldewald hadn’t even come out

yet, so I was flying high on the potential for gay representation in the magical
world. Then the movie came out. Then she started retweeting things. Then she
wrote the essay. Then she wrote the book. And on and on. I don’t think I need to
go into all the

gory details of Rowling’s descent into TERFism. Contrapoints made a fantastic
video doing

that, so just go watch that if you want an actual trans person’s opinion. I’m
just a cis guy holding a grudge. The TLDR version is that Rowling has spent

the last several years positioning herself as TERF, (Trans Exclusionary Radical
Feminist)

numero uno on the internet. She’s been very good at doing that thing

we all associate with racists. You know. “I’m very good friends with trans
people,

but…” “I’m not transphobic, but…” Now before some of ya’ll jump down my throat,

no I’m not calling her racist. The way she codes certain characters of colour

in her books is… questionable, but she hasn’t done anything out and out racist,
as far as

I know. Though her appropriation of native American

beliefs for Fantastic Beasts was… contentious. No, she’s instead, been laser
focused on

trans people. It’s much safer to be transphobic than racist

these days anyway. People might give you dirty looks, or even

stop talking to you if you’re too racist too publicly. At least in
semi-civilized circles. Same for homophobia, really. Imagine if Rowling went
full homophobe. She’d have no choice but to write under

a psyudenum next time! But not so when it comes to trans people. Even a lot of
people who support trans rights

aren’t willing to risk their social cache on defending them, especially to
someone like

Rowling. Some celebrities, such as the younger cast

of the Harry Potter movies did come out and declare “trans women are women”,
which

is good. Though the older actors all seem to be in

lockstep with Rowling’s more… conservative point of view. Some of the actors of
the Fantastic Beasts

movies even came out against her transphobia. But. It’s not like they left the
movies. And before you say they couldn’t because

of contractual obligations… contracts between actors and studios have Morality
clauses. That’s why Johnny Depp isn’t in Fantastic

Beasts anymore. Studios can nullify contracts if an actor

does something morally reprehensible (Murder, sexual assault, spousal abuse,
etc), and actors

can nullify the contract if they believe producers of a film are committing acts
that go against

their own morals. And since JK Rowling IS a producer on the

Fantastic Beasts movies, this leaves the actors wide open to drop the franchise
like the steaming

pile of mediocrity it is. But they haven’t so to hell with them. If box office
numbers are any indication,

the franchise isn’t long for this world anyway. And don’t start with the “Crimes
of Grindlewald

made 654 million dollars world wide, its a success”. No. That movie had a 200
million dollar production

budget, plus over a hundred million in advertising spend. That’s three hundred
million dollars spent. The studio only gets , roughly, 50% of the

box office gross because theaters keep the other 50% (Chinese theaters keep
around 70%),

so Warner Bros made a profit of roughly 26 million dollars off that movie, if
you’re

being generous. A precipitous drop from the highs of the Harry

Potter franchise. And since the next movie is going to be releasing

into a world where people may or may not be comfortable going back to theatres,
I can

only imagine it will be making even less. How did this become a seminar on the
minutea

of the film industry? Back to Rowling. I can’t wrap my head around how all of
this

happened. Honestly. How this woman who wrote books that’s defined

my adolescence, and the adolescences of queer people around the world, became so
toxic? How did she, so quickly, go from being the

author held up by millions as an example of wokeness… to this? It’s a long
story. See I discovered the books in 2001, just before

the first movie came out, and only about a year after I myself came out. Other
than getting a rock off the back of

the head and some minor brain damage, nobody really had a problem with my being
gay. But my god I was lonely. Not only was I gay in a small town but I was

fat and gay in a small town. I knew that even if I did manage to find other

gay people they probably wouldn’t want anything to do with me. So I escaped that
shitty world for the magical

one she created. Out of order, mind you. I started with Prisoner of Azkaban,
then Chamber

of Secrets, then Philosopher’s Stone, then Goblet of Fire. After that I read the
books as they were released. I was one of the kids who made his parents

drive him to a book store at midnight so he could buy the newest entry in the
adventures

of Harry, Hermione, and Ron. I’m the one who started studying mythology

because of the off-hand references that Rowling sprinkled throughout the books.
I was at every preview screening of the movies,

which was pretty hard to pull off living 40 minutes away from the nearest movie
theatre. But I was there. Sometimes I was there all alone because my

parents were busy and my friends weren’t into Harry Potter. Growing up in a
small town, I had next to

no exposure to anyone who wasn’t white, straight, and catholic. I never even met
a black person until I was

sixteen. So I could have come dangerously close to

becoming a close-minded bigot. I certainly wouldn’t have been the only

one in the area. But that didn’t happen. Instead I was open to new ideas, new
people

of different races and backgrounds. People who saw the world differently than

me. Who had different lived experiences than me. Because I got to escape to
Hogwarts. Where being different didn’t mean you were

bad. Where being weird meant you were special,

not deviant. Where students of different races and nationalities

came together to bring down a villain hellbent on destroying pluralism. Who
wanted the world to be exactly as he saw

it, and would kill anyone who stepped out of line. So because of seven books and
eight movies,

I had my mind forced open to the fact that people who are different from me are
not less

than me. Something I appreciated when I got to film

school and was surrounded by the types of people I’d only ever seen on tv and in
movie

up until then. And I thanked Rowling for that. She helped this lonely gay kid
feel not so

alone, that there was a group of people out there, somewhere, who would accept
me. Who would welcome me in and make me feel like

a part of something bigger than just my small town. And I thanked her for that
by spending as

much money on Harry Potter merchandise as I could. I loved it all. Different
house scarves. Lego. Collectors edition sets of the books and movies.
Over-priced wands. I was even saving up to pay an exorbitant

amount of money for tickets to see the Cursed Child play before I read it and
realized it

was horrible. But it wasn’t written by Rowling, so that

explained everything! As far as I was concerned everything she touched

was gold. And then… things started to rust. PART TWO: The Chamber of Anger First
came The Crimes of Grindlewald. I don’t think I’ve ever given a movie

so much leeway. Leading up to the release I, and many other

people, were incredibly excited to finally get on screen confirmation of the
relationship

between Dumbledore and Grindlewald, something Rowling had confirmed after the
release of

the final Harry Potter book. And then the director said we wouldn’t be

getting it in this movie and then the movie came out and… well, we didn’t get
it. But that was ok, I said. We’d get it eventually. And I fought with so many
people on the internet

saying that “no no no, of course they weren’t going to have Dumbledore and
Grindlewald making

out in this movie. They’d save that until the finale! Movie 5. Because that way
you’d be less likely to

lose the family audience throughout the series.” Nevermind that the script for
Crimes of Grindlewald

was a disaster that absolutely reeked of first draft sickness. But I defended
the movie and Rowling online

to no end. I spent hours figuring out how they could

confirm the relationship between Grindlewald and Dumbledore in some physical way
that could

retain the PG-13 rating, and be easily removable for markets like China and
Russia. I was invested in convincing other people

that they were wrong to criticize her. That she was playing the game as best she

could. After it was a box office disappointment,

I made the argument that it should go to a streaming service, like Netflix or
the eventually

announced HBO MAX. Since HBO MAX doesn’t exist in, well, anywhere

outside the US, let alone in China and Russia, you wouldn’t have to worry about
the movie

being banned in countries with homophobic governments. And you wouldn’t have to
worry about parents

groups losing their shit about gay wizards because the HBO MAX subscription
model had

already locked them in for a year or more. And by the time it came up for
renewal, they’d

have forgotten about it and stayed subscribed for a DC show or a Game of Thrones
show or

something. But as I was busy defending her, and trying

to figure out ways Warner Media could make money, she’d been busy doing other
things. Unfortunately, it wasn’t taking screenwriting

classes. JK Rowling had been busy on Twitter. Starting out simply by retweeting
some transphobic

tweets that her PR representatives deemed a “clumsy and middle-aged moment”. I
bought the spin of course, because how on

earth could the woman who helped ensure I didn’t grow up to be a bigot be, well,
a

bigot? Obviously it was a mistake. She hadn’t seen these people’s other,

way more transphobic tweets. This happened right around the time that Lego

started releasing Harry Potter sets, including a piece by piece recreation of
Hogwarts. So, of course, I bought each set immediately

upon release. All the while defending her to gay friends

but, keeping quiet about her to my trans friends. Underneath my adoration for
her I was starting

to feel… embarrassed. But it was easy enough to just keep buying

the merchandise, because the lego was being released during a time when Rowling
had mostly

disappeared from social media. Taking a self imposed break after the backlash

that followed the initial retweets of transphobes. Only popping up once and a
while with cryptic

posts about upcoming projects, or confirming fan theories about Harry Potter
that she never

bothered to write into the books. And then came the tweets. They started
relatively benign enough, with

Rowling being frustrated over the term “People who menstruate”. A term that’s
trying to be inclusive of

certain trans men but just sounds… off. In the right light it does sound a tad
bit

dehumanizing, so I could see why people would be put off by it. Then she started
retweeting loud and proud

TERFS like Maya Forstater and the shit completely hit the fan. When some of her
followers criticized the

tweet as being off-color or even possibly transphobic Rowling responded by
saying: “Dress however you please. Call yourself whatever you like. Sleep with
any consenting adult who’ll have

you. Live your best life in peace and security. But force women out of their
jobs for stating

that sex is real?” Later saying: “If sex isn’t real, there’s no same-sex

attraction. If sex isn’t real, the lived reality of

women globally is erased. I know and love trans people, but erasing

the concept of sex removes the ability of many to meaningfully discuss their
lives. It isn’t hate to speak the truth.” And out came the “If sex isn’t real”

argument. This is something that TERFs love to do. Equate sex and gender. Either
because their ignorant of the difference,

too dumb to tell, or just assholes. Essentially, sex is biological in nature.
It’s determined on a chromosomal level. Masculine and feminine sexual
characteristics

are, for the most part determined by this. I say for the most part because
intersex people

also exist, despite what TERFs will admit, and really ought to be included in
the conversation. Not everyone in the whole wide world fits

into the neat little binary of XX or XY chromosomes. So sex is biological.
Immutable. Whereas gender is a social construct. Man and woman. Something that a
lot of people think is innate

in nature. Even though for thousands of years there have

been third genders recognized all over the world. Non-binary genders. In many
places people who didn’t fit neatly

into the male or female category were considered closer to god because of it.
But TERFs have a hard enough time wrapping

their head around the idea of someone born into a feminine body transitioning,
binarily,

into a masculine one. Or vice versa. Can you imagine their heads exploding at
the

concept of not having to be male or female? Wingardium Levi-o-shit! On top of
that, she used the argument that

“If sex isn’t real, there’s no same sex attraction”. The loudest dog whistle in
the world to try

and pit cisgender gays and lesbians against trans people. Almost threatening us
that “If you let transgender

be a thing, that completely delegitimizes everything you’ve fought for”. It
doesn’t. She was just trying to win over some allies. And then she doubled down,
and tripled down,

and quadrupled down until finally publishing a thousand page detective novel
with a serial

killer who dresses up like a woman in order to ubduct and murder them. I mean I
know she’s well known for pulling

themes and creatures from mythology for Harry Potter, but did she have to pull
out a lazy

thriller trope that’s even older than she is? That was played out before the
first Harry

Potter book was published. Silence of the Lambs did this and is one of

the best movies ever made. You’re not going to do better. And you know you’re
not going to do it better. So why try? Could it be that you’re delusional enough

to think that you can write a thriller that’s better than Silence of the Lambs?
Or, maybe, are you doing it because you have

an agenda? It’s the second one, btw. In case I’m being too subtle. PART THREE:
The Prisoner of Gender But how did this happen? How did the woman who told an
entire generation

of kids that being their true selves is good, and the right thing… end up doing
a 180

and completely disavowing a whole group of people just trying to live their
lives? I mean it came as a hell of a shock to me

but it wasn’t all that shocking to people who know what’s going on in current
mainstream

British feminism. An anti-trans strain of feminism has always

simmered under the surface, but it’s really come to light over the last few
years in England,

especially after the proposed changes to the nation’s Gender Recognition Act.
The Gender Recognition Act, a law put on the

books in 2004, sets up the legal process for trans people to change their legal
gender

on their birth certificates. Because at the time that decision was not

made by you, or your doctor, but by an anonymous group of beurocrats. In 2017,
the government announced a possible

reform that would let trans people make a legal declaration that they pledged to
live

the rest of their lives as their transitioned gender. But there was a hell of a
lot of backlash

from TERFs, people who generally hate trans people, and the very transphobic
English press

who had a habit of running stories with dead names. These reporters falsely
claimed that allowing

trans people to “self-ID” meant that a person could declare themselves a man on
Monday

and a woman on Friday, allowing rapists to gain access to women’s only spaces
like

bathrooms and changing rooms. Now, I’ve never been sexually assaulted,

but I do know a disturbing amount of women who have. I’ve been the one taking
them to the hospital,

the cops, or the counciling sessions. And something I’ve discovered through all

of this is… rapists don’t go through that much effort. They just do it. It’s a
power thing. Men who believe they’re more powerful than

women are not going to dress up as a woman in order to assault her. They’re too
lazy for that, don’t give

them that much credit. But I digress. The campaign of lies in the press soon
moved

on to spread more lies, now about trans children. That kids were being forced to
transition

by ultra-woke parents and experimental doctors. As a result, a large proportion
of mainstream

British feminists started loudly proclaiming that it’s not possible to change
biological

sex. Always ALWAYS focusing on biology and not

sociology. No one, to my knowledge, has claimed that

a trans person can change their chromosomal sex. Only in a perfect world. BUT,
one can change their gender, because

that is simply how you are perceived by society. Lavern Cox may have an X and a
Y chromosome,

but if you’re lucky enough to see her walking down the street, you’re not
thinking anything

but woman. Meanwhile, in most mainstream North American

feminist circles, speaking out against trans women and men is not considered
feminism at

all. It’s considered being a dick head. But trans-exclusionary radical feminist
(TERF)

ideology has been helped along in the UK by false media campaigns lead by the
likes of

Rupert Murdoch, the Australian billionaire who birthed Fox News. Any opposition
to gender-critical or TERF

thought in the UK brings accusations of “silencing women”, leading to Australian
TERF Sheila

Jeffreys going before the UK Parliament in March of 2018 to declare that trans
women

“parasites,”. Charming. vox.com reported that According to , who studies

the modern gender-critical movement, gender-critical feminism in the UK grew out
of a toxic mix

of historical imperialism, and any concept that looks at gender as anything but
biologically

determined. Those who rose to prominence in the movement

did so through “Call out culture”, attacking trans men and women online.
Declaring trans women to be male perverts,

and trans men to be lost lesbian sisters. Nevermind that trans men can also be
gay or

bisexual. Another fact TERFS don’t like acknowledging. “Anti-trans feminists
think they have science

on their side,” Greensmith said. “It is bananas how ascientific their rhetoric

is, and yet literally they say, ‘Biology isn’t bigotry.’ In fact, biology has
been used as bigotry

as long as biology has been a thing.” Biology has been used to hold people down

for thousands of years. Holding down women, people of color - You

name a non-white-male group and biology has been used to bring the boot down on
them at

some point. And the biology narrative has only grown in

the UK. TERFism has become so prevalent there that

many liberal pundits even blamed the conservative Tory victory in the last
parliamentary election

on trans people, saying that trans issues are just a hyper-woke product of a
political

left that has simply gone too far. BREXIT was even blamed on trans people.
Donald Trump’s election win in 2016 was

blamed on trans people! By British people! So English feminists, of which JK
Rowling

considers herself a proud member, were already at a tipping point when Maya
Forstater sued

the Centre for Global Development, a non-profit think tank that decided not to
renew her expiring

contract when they discovered that she’d been spreading TERFY shit all over the
internet. After a hearing with a UK employment tribunal,

Judge James Tayler (good name) ruled that Forstater’s gender-critical views did
not

represent a legally protected philosophical belief. He said: “I consider that
the Claimant’s view,

in its absolutist nature, is incompatible with human dignity and [the]
fundamental rights

of others.” That’s when the “Dress however you please”

tweet came out, and it’s just been downhill ever since. Including publishing an
overly long essay

basically explaining why she thinks trans people aren’t valid. Mostly has to do
with bathrooms, because of

course it does. One person replied to her tweets, writing:

“As a physician, I want people to know that sex exists on a bimodal biological
spectrum

just like gender exists on a bimodal sociological spectrum. While most identify
as either female or male,

there are intersex and trans individuals whose identities are just as valid and
real.” Rowling proceeded to block them. And ever since then she has been more
than

happy to spout off about her ignorant beliefs whenever given the chance. Like in
her 3600 word blog, “TERF Wars”. Oh she’s so funny. “TERF Wars” aha ha ha ha
PART FOUR: The Goblet of Bargaining In the blog, Rowling writes about her
struggles

with sexism and misogyny, adding that reading accounts of gender dysphoria in
trans men

had made her wonder “if I’d been born 30 years later, I too might have tried to

transition”. Also writing: “Many, myself included, believe

we are watching a new kind of conversion therapy for young gay people, who are
being set on

a lifelong path of medicalization.” Some readers took this as her actually
comparing

gender confirming therapies to gay conversion therapy, which has been labeled
torture by

many psychological professionals. You didn’t have to stretch very far to see

the comparison. Her response to this was: “I’ve ignored fake tweets attributed
to

me and RTed widely. I’ve ignored porn tweeted at children on

a thread about their art. I’ve ignored death and rape threats. I’m not going to
ignore this.” Well at least she’s got her priorities straight. Then she signed
an open letter condemning

cancel culture. The billionaire author who lives in a castle

and was about to have another book hit #1 on the New York Times Best Seller
list…

complaining about being cancelled. Warner Bros official statement regarding her

repeated infractions was: Couldn’t use the word transgender once,

huh? I mean they might have well said, “we believe

in people” for how much sense and genuine emotion this statement had. But,
Warner Bros hasn’t been known for making

a lot of sense lately. There has been some backlash, mostly from

queer inclusive groups. But the most interesting response has actually

been from the fans. To a very large extent, fans of Harry Potter

have been beside themselves… ourselves,,, with her actions. While some just wish
she’d stop, and go

back to the Rowling we thought we knew and loved… many are not afraid of letting
her

know how they feel on social media. And it’s gotten under her skin too. She
threatened to sue some people for calling

her a bigot on Twitter, and apparently hasn’t spoken to Emma Watson since the
actress posted

this photo of herself on Instagram with a shirt declaring “Trans rights are
human

rights”. The thing is though, Rowling is pretty insulated

from most negativity toward her. She’s surrounded herself with fellow TERFs

who agree with her. She’s fabulously wealthy. If she didn’t make one more single
solitary

penny for the rest of her life, her family could live in luxury for centuries. I
mean she lives in a literal castle. So she couldn’t care less if people are

angry with her about her opinion on trans people. She’s got money. She’s got
influence. Her books are still #1 bestsellers, even when

her name isn’t on them. Funnily enough, book wise, she’s been careful

with her name. The book about the cross dressing serial killer

was published under her non-de-plum, Robert Galbraith, creating a little layer
of insulation

for her, at least among the uninformed. Her name, these days, only gets branded
onto

things that have to do with Wizards, but even that isn’t set in stone. When the
first Fantastic Beasts movie came

out the branding behind it was “JK Rowling’s Wizarding World”. But by the time
the sequel hit theatres it

was just “Wizarding World”. And that’s how it’s stayed ever since. Back in 2018
she’d already started in with

the so called “Middle aged moments” by retweeting people calling trans women
“men

in dresses”. So I wouldn’t be surprised if Warner Bros,

who own a massive stake in the Harry Potter brand, had a hand in removing her
name from

the series branding. Not because they’re so trans friendly, but

because they didn’t want to risk it becoming a public relations issue. And for
the most part, it worked. People, even those in the queer community,

still love Harry Potter. Despite Rowling. People have been able to separate the
author

from the creation so that they can continue to enjoy the world she created
without supporting

her personally. This was my take on things as late as last

summer. To some extent I guess it still is. If I had completely disowned her
creations

I probably wouldn’t have a thousand dollars worth of Hogwarts lego. But the TERF
wars article kind of broke me. I couldn’t pretend that supporting her creations

wasn’t supporting her anymore. I started coming at this a bit differently

than a lot of people, especially my fellow cis people. I’ve found that trans
folks are far more

willing to drop her and everything she’s created, which makes a lot of sense.
She’s been using her vast influence to hurt

the trans community for years now. But I also have some trans friends who have

actually gotten tattoos of the deathly hallows or harry’s glasses just to spite
her. Because they love the wizarding world. It helped them feel accepted at a
time when

they couldn’t even accept themselves and they’ll be damned if they’re going to

let her take that away from them. It’s a really weird situation all around. The
way I’ve come to looking at it is… I can’t spend another dime on branded Harry

Potter merchandise. Even though there’s some lego sets I desperately

want. But plenty of people, even trans people, disagree

with me on that. You see, things like lego and action figures

and scarves and puzzles and video games… companies signed licenses for those
things

long before she went full TERF, at least publicly. They could use the morality
clause in their

contracts to sever ties with her, but they’ve spent so much money on the
products already

that the projected loss of revenue would have their stockholders abandoning
ship. One could argue that buying the merchandise

though just reinforces companies willingness to work with transphobes. That they
can work with TERFs and bigots because,

when it comes to the trans community, it won’t mean any lost sales. But from
another point of view, NOT buying

Harry Potter stuff because she’s apparently a rabid bigot is really only hurting
the companies

producing the products. Because she already got paid when the contract

was signed. She doesn’t get royalties from sales, she

gets an upfront licensing fee. Take for instance the upcoming Hogwarts Legacy

video game from Avalanche Studios. They’re a great little studio that have

made a lot of fun games over the years. Their bread and butter was actually
doing

video games for Disney, like the super fun Disney Infinity series, but they
almost had

to close when Disney shuttered Disney Interactive. The companies and its
employees were pretty

much left out to dry until they lucked out and got the chance to work on
Hogwarts Legacy

in 2017, saving the company from bankruptcy. A year before JK Rowling made the
first “men

in dresses” retweet. And Avalanche, to their credit, has made it

VERY clear that Rowling has absolutely NO involvement with the game’s
development. So, if you’re interested in the game, and

you want to play it when it eventually gets released, is it fair to boycott it
because

of the rotten things Rowling has said? I don’t have the answer to that, but it’s

a question worth asking. Because there is a very valid argument that

says the by buying Harry Potter merchandise, you’re not necessarily making her
richer,

since she’s already been paid for it, but that you’re continuing to make her
relevant. And her being relevant to the cultural conversation

gives her power and influence. A lot more power and influence than her just

being rich. A lot of people make the argument that buying

Wizarding World merch is putting more money in her pocket. A fair argument but…
She’s already so rich that taking a few

sales away from her will have a net zero effect on her life. But if you love
Harry Potter, if it means

something to you, removing it from your life entirely might actually have an
effect on

you. Because for many of us, Harry Potter represents

something more than just a book we read as kids or teens. It became a part of
our identity because it

exists in a very rarified place of cultural importance. Formative literature.
PART FIVE: The Order of Foundations Formative Bigotry You may have noticed that
this is a bit of

a sore spot for me, and that given that I’m a self-identified Harry Potter fan
or a…

recovering Harry Potter fan. Or a… Harry Potter fan in remission? [Shrugs]
Anyway, this isn’t me blasting Rowling because

I’m trying to hide the fact that I love the franchise in order to make it seem
like

I’m publicly distancing myself from her and it. The point is that I’m getting so
flustered

over this not because I’m putting on airs, but because I've kind of taken it
personally. how all of this has gone. Or rather, I feel kind of personally
attacked. By Rowling. Like she went out of her way to whip me into

a defensive frenzy to absolve her of any perceived wrongdoing. Specifically me.
But then I have to ask myself. Why is it that I, at the time, and others

who — to this day — continue to defend Rowling against all criticism? I mean I
jumped ship when she said the quiet

part loudly enough, even then I might have held out for longer than I should
have. But why do people still defend her when she’s

shown her true colours? And not even the turfy-kinda veneration of

her gender critical beliefs, or people who dismiss the issue altogether, but why
do so

many people still continue to argue that she isn’t, in fact, transphobic? Why go
through the mental gymnastics of explaining

how her poorly-edited, gender-critical tirades are in fact not only reasonable,
but in fact

trans-inclusive? She gives them a reason to, though. To this day JK Rowling
continues to insist

that she loves and respects trans people. But i think she feels that trans
gender identity

is this kind of variant of an assigned birth gender? Kinda like a trans-woman
exists as a variant

of man, and vice versa. And she’s made it clear she’s willing

to love and support that. As long as trans women continue to identify

as men, she’s on board for that. I can see her as one of those white women

who insist that drag is cultural appropriation of women. The thing is, love and
support is Rowling’s

brand. That’s kind of the identifiable niche she

carved out for herself, not only by making Hogwards visually diverse — if a
little

stereotypical to the point of ignorance — but the brazen theme of the books is
diversity. And she kept that rolling through her correspondence

with both the press and her audience. I couldn't help but wonder... why is it
that

her fandom clung to this brand for as long as they did? And… is there anything
she could do to stick

the last nail in the coffin of her own career. The thing with Rowling and Harry
Potter is

that these are children’s books. While at the same time it was accessible,

it also didn’t talk down to it’s audience and laid out character intentions and
feelings

that were easy to understand for children but complex enough to keep older
readers engaged. And this isn’t to absolve Rowling of wrongdoing

because she wrote a good book. Yegch. That bothers me a lot. When people who
don’t like Rowling stack

on and act like the Harry Potter books are trash either because she’s trash or
because

the books are popular. But Harry Potter is also… well… kind of

a special case as far as book series go. At the time, nothing like it had ever
happened

before. It STARTED as a children’s book… and then

grew up with the audience. First, finding a niche in that young adult

period, and then by book seven kind of even reached toward the New Adult genre.
not only did these books generate a paradigm

shift in the publishing industry, but they did so while managing to keep a group
of children

interested in a series well into their teens or even twenties. When it comes to
serialized children’s literature,

young readers who follow the series usually drop it as they grow out of the
content. It isn’t until the series comes to a completion

that you get an audience who can read the entire backlog at once while they’re
still

young. So… if harry potter had stayed as child-focused

as it started, then a lot of us probably would have cut and run before book
five. Especially before book five. But Harry Potter grew up with us. And we got
to see the complexity of the books

unfold as our own lives were becoming more complex and independent. So not only
was Harry Potter beloved to our

childhood, but also our mid-and later teenage years — depending on how old you
were when

you started reading it. And for those who had the opportunity to read

the whole series at once, you could see a very… realistic progression of a
developing

teenage identity. So in either case, the books stick with you,

and so you stick with the book from beginning to end. And in the process of
being involved with

a series for seven instalments, that’s a lot of time and thought devoted to
processing

this media. Critically, at a period in your life where

you do not have a super developed capacity for critical thinking. At the same
time that you are able to recognize

the morals of the story, you cannot recognize the way that this narration is
conditioning

you to act a certain way. And these morals are so very clearly directed

at cooperation, acceptance of the other, and the strength and importance of the
individual

existing within a community. We see those values and we like those values. So,
until some of us are conditioned into

Randian, personal-gain, kind of objectivist thinking, we do lean towards
inclusion as

an innate state of default. We don’t understand the social constructs

of why person from Racist group A can’t interact with person from diverse group
B. This kind of segregation, as many have remarked,

is learned behaviour. So the inclusive values in Harry Potter feel

natural to us as children. And because most children don’t understand

the history of the IRA, and the colonial occupation of Ireland, they aren’t
going to be able

to critically discern WHY it’s a little problematic that the ONLY Irish student
at

Hogwarts is constantly making things explode. Same thing with the goblins. We
LEARN about the Holocaust and antisemitism

and stereotypes around Jewish people. So we do not have the innate ability to
think

critically about the depiction of Goblins being disturbingly close to how the
Nazis

portrayed Jewish people in propaganda. Instead, we let this media shape us.
Because a) we like it and b) it speaks to

values that we internally hold as truths. But we also do not have the ability to
critically

think in a way where we can accept media and separate the values we like from
the values

we dislike. It’s either all good, or all bad. And quite frankly, a lot of adults
are not

that well versed in critical thought either. So as we accept Harry Potter as a
component

of our formative development of values and worldview, it, essentially, becomes a
component

of our identities. And Harry Potter especially, because it was

produced and presented to the public on the cusp of an era. The year after the
deathly hallows was released

the stock market crashed. Many of us immediately started getting called

lazy, expecting handouts, entitled, wanting a trophy for showing up. Before then
We were told that if we just did

what we loved, everything would work out. We were told that fulfilment was the
most

important part of getting a career. And that money wasn’t as important as
happiness. …And then we were told to take that job

at starbucks, getting berated and verbally abused by customers, and we were told
to be

grateful we had anything at all. Our complaints about student debt fell on

deaf ears from generations who, when they were younger, started out with
‘nothing’

and made something of themselves. In an age where they could get a
family-supporting

job with a high school diploma. In an age where you could work part time and

put yourself through school, when minimum wage was high enough and tuition was
low enough

to do that. I for one, would have loved to start with

‘nothing’ rather than a heap of debt from a degree I couldn’t really use to get
that

fulfilment I was promised. Everything didn’t just ‘work out’ because

we followed our dreams. In fact… we were told to… put our dreams

on hold. Or that we should just make it a hobby. Or just… wait until retirement.
Or just realize that everyone doesn’t get

to be an astronaut and we should just settle for being a barista. Not speaking
from personal experience, my

parents were incredibly encouraging. But many of us who had degrees and jobs at

starbucks had parents who thought that because we didn’t have a job in our field
it just

meant that we weren’t looking for them. So many of our role models turned their
backs

on us, and refused to listen to the reality of our situation. Because it didn’t
match up with what it

was like ‘when they were our age.’ And according to them, the world, apparently,

was incapable of change. By the time our role models realized that…

no… there isn’t just this trove of jobs out there, waiting for resumes dropped
off

to the manager with a wink and a handshake. By that time… we’d stopped caring
what

they thought. We pushed away from our role models who built

up our expectations and did nothing to admit that maybe… this wasn’t our fault.
…Except JK Rowling. Who, famously, came from poverty and obscurity,

living in public housing, on social assistance, getting fired from jobs because
she was working

on her manuscript. Facing rejection, mental illness, abusive

people, her own role models, who did not believe in her and in spite of all of
it, she force

fed their words back to them and founded a creative empire on a dream and a
little creativity. She proved to us that our dreams were possible,

while telling us that the problems we complained about were valid, and we had
every right to

be angry. And we had every right to keep dreaming. Harry Potter was formative to
our values,

and JK Rowling, now in the public eye, told us that we didn’t have to abandon
those

values to ‘fit in’ with what our once-mentors told us we had to be. What we had
to sacrifice in order to succeed. Without realizing that success, by their
standards,

didn’t exist anymore, except for a few exceptions. So, not only the books, but
she herself was

formative in how we held on to our identity through a crisis nobody believed was
happening. And so no, people don’t want to admit she

did anything wrong. To admit that she herself could turn into

an icon of the kind of wrong-minded, bigoted, exclusionary, out-of-touch,
ignorant, hateful,

tone-deaf, and unwilling to learn and grow and develop and accept new things,
new ways

of thinking. To admit that she had become everything that

would have told her she would never succeed, that we would never succeed… I got
to admit, I’m not sure how that works. Which is why we held on to Rowling for so

long. Which is why I held on to that initial variant

of Rowling, the one that cut through hatred and resistance so that people could
flourish. Because that was the Rowling that we accepted. So the new version…
that must just be a

mistake. There must be a reason for that. Because these two versions are
incompatible. It’s… almost impossible to get someone

to remove something that they consider to be part of their identity. Not like
it’s their fault, human beings

are built to think that way. Our consciousness is designed to identify

itself by things that feel familiar. The opposite is what? Cognitive dissonance?
We HAVE to hold on to what we identify with. And if that thing is some rags to
riches British

author... we have less agency in shaping ourselves than we think. And that’s
especially true at younger ages

because we don’t realize that this fun book we’re reading is actually shaping
our entire

identity. Which like… really should scare the shit

out of authors of Young Adult and Children’s literature. I mean you are
developing a one-way line of

communication direct with a small person’s subconscious. And… they WILL absorb
all the subliminal

messaging in there. Whether it’s intended to be there or not. And that can stay
with them for their entire

life. In the instance of Harry Potter, the value

on the surface is so strongly associated with inclusion, we give it the benefit
of the doubt. Because… we are biased creatures. And in many cases We aren’t
aware of what

those biases are. For instance, it’s not likely that Tolkein

deliberately intended to code th forces of Mordor as representatives of
dark-skinned

individuals. He was trying to establish a dichotomy between

darkness and light, and didn’t understand, and did not live in an era where it
was projected

that skin colour ought to be treated sensitively. And because Tolkein never did
something that

was like… errantly hateful, most people can separate the surface value meaning
from

the problematic instances. And I thought, for a while, that I could do

that with Harry Potter. You know, just kinda… remove Rowling’s

gender politics and enjoy what was in the rest of the books. But now it just
hangs off my back. Weighing down the love I have for her creation. And killing
the admiration I had for her. PART SIX: The Half-Depressed Prince Every
September 1, people around the world

celebrate the day that students go to Hogwarts, with many proclaiming on social
media “It’s

time to go home”. It’s almost reached religious levels of

devotion, with some fans making the pilgrimage to Kings Cross Station,
congregating at the

little sign in between platforms nine and ten, and counting down to when the
train leaves

at 11:00am sharp. Others opt to travel to Universal Studios,

where they can wander around Diagon Alley, being fitted for their robes,
receiving their

very own wand, and then casting their gaze toward the reproduction of Hogwarts
that looms

high above the land. I never really got to partake in any of that,

mind you. I didn’t have the money to travel to London

for September 1, or to go to Universal Studios and visit Diagon Alley. Not in
time, anyway. Not before Rowling… did the things. There’s even a head canon
reason why fans

of a certain generation, mine, never got their letters to go to Hogwarts.
Because of Voldemort’s power grab in the

seventh book, all documentation tracking muggles with magical powers was
destroyed. And therefor, after 1997, no eleven year old

without wizard parents got their letters. It’s a silly and fun way to let the
magical

idea of Hogwarts live on. That we actually are witches and wizards,

we just didn’t get our letters because a mad fascist didn’t want us included.
And In 2012, Harry Potter fans around the

world cheered Britain’s then Prime Minister David Cameron’s declaration that May
2 would

forevermore be known as International Harry Potter Day. Why May 2? The Battle of
Hogwarts was fought on this

date in 1998. The final conflict of the Second Wizarding

War. The Order of the Phoenix proved victorious,

ending the most devastating battle of that war and resulting in numerous
casualties,

including Remus Lupin, Nymphadora Tonks, Lavender Brown, Colin Creavey, Severus
Snape, and Fred

Weasley. But most notably the defeat of Lord Voldemort,

or Tom Riddle. Every year brings different ways to commemorate

and celebrate this day. There are anniversaries to recognize, characters

to memorialize, places to see. In Cameron’s official statement announcing

the new holiday he said “In order to fully commemorate and immortalize her work,
we have

decided to officially declare May 2nd as an official international holiday, in
honor of

the date that protagonist Harry Potter conquered the main antagonist of the
series, Lord Voldemort. We hope that children and adults alike will

be reminded of Harry Potter’s strong and courageous character on this day, as
well

as of the true credit that Ms. Rowling has made to society.” In case you can’t
tell, this is not the

typical. This isn’t usually what people do after

a book series has ended. It’s become something beyond its creator. JK Rowling
gets the credits for all of this,

in an official sense, being the creator. But she didn’t organize the pilgrimages

to Kings Cross. She hasn’t been the one keeping the series

alive with countless theory videos and head canon explanations across the
internet. She just confirms them sometimes. And when she comes up with her own,
its about

Wizards crapping on the ground and magicking it away with their wand. The fans
are the people who have kept this

brand alive since the books finished their run in 2007, the year I graduated
from high

school, and the final film was released in 2011. Long before Rowling officially
launched Pottermore

in 2015, (everything before then was considered a beta), fans had been doing the
hard work

of keeping their favourite characters alive. Fans took ownership of the the
characters. Fan fiction communities for Harry Potter had

always been popular, but they really took off once the series had finished.
People were telling their own stories in the

world. Creating their own characters. Adding to the mythology. And a whole lot
of the people behind those

new stories were queer and trans. People who understood that Rowling couldn’t

include people like us in the initial books because of the then existing UK law
that said

books with LGBT characters weren’t allowed in children’s libraries. So we
assumed that was the only reason we

weren’t there, and many of us created out own stories to fill in the gaps.
Creating new characters to exist right alongside

Harry, Ron, and Hermione. And why wouldn’t we? In 2014 JK Rowling stated, very
clearly, that

gay, lesbian, bi, AND transgender students could, of course, attend Hogwarts.
She even said that they may use magic to help

deal with gender confirmation. She didn’t use those exact words of course,

instead clinically stating that one could change their genitals, but the meaning
was

still there. So It’s no wonder her being a TERF came

like a punch to the gut to so many. And why so many people, myself very much
included,

preferred to ignore her slights on Twitter until it became impossible to do so.
Until she went out of her way to remove that

last shadow of a doubt that so many of us clung to. And it sucks. I hate it. I
hate that I defended her. I hate that I ignored her growing transphobia. But
most of all, I hate that I had to. I hate that she put me and so many fans, gay,

straight, bi, cis, trans, non-binary… That she put us in the position of HAVING

to ignore her ignorant and potentially dangerous comments. Because she had
helped us form our identities

as accepting, loving, people. The ones who would help the first years at

Hogwarts feel comfortable in their new home. No matter where they came from,
what they

looked like, or what dormitory they slept in. Over the course of just a few
short years

Joanne Rowling went from being the most tolerant, accepting, loving professor at
Hogwarts…

to She Who Must Not Be Named. And while doing so she created her own hoard

of TERFY death eaters to go along with her, leaving the rest of us heartbroken
at the

betrayal, and trying to figure out what to do next. Do we cut Harry Potter out
of our lives. Or just it’s creator? Do we have to let go of something that made

us feel so happy and safe? Or can we just let go of her? Can there be Harry
Potter without JK Rowling? PART SEVEN: The Deathly Acceptance (At desk with
Harry Potter perch everywhere) I’ve been asking myself that question at

least once a week for the last year and a half. Can I still enjoy Harry Potter,
even though

JK Rowling is who, it turns out, she is. Can I still read the books? Watch the
movies? Play a video game? Buy lego. Can I play with my wands? I have Slytherin
and Ravenclaw scarves and

this past winter, on the very rare occasion I got to leave the house, I felt
like I couldn’t

wear them. What about my Hogwarts backpack? Can I still use that without feeling
like

I’m promoting TERF ideology? I know that for people for whom Harry Potter

was just another book or movie, this probably sounds crazy. I feel like it would
be akin to Marvel fans

finding out that Stan Lee was secretly fighting against civil rights in America,
or that George

Lucas secretly financed the January 6th attack on the capital. It’s just so
antithetical to the image we

have of these people. But luckily, in reality, Stan Lee was a pretty

progressive guy who loved adding diversity to the Marvel Comics universe. And
George Lucas abhors fascism, in case the

bad guys in Star Wars being space nazis was too subtle for you. But how does
someone deal with discovering

that a person who helped them develop their identity is… bad? People who read
Orson Scott Card books as

a kid had to do it when they founds out he was actually a raging homophobe. HP
Lovecraft was a virulent racist and anti-semite…

but his world has been adopted since his death, with countless Jewish writer and
writers of

color making his mythos safe for everyone. So it’s not a new phenomena. But
certainly nothing like it has happened

at this scale. No modern author has had the reach of JK Rowling. The cultural
permeability. Harry Potter has sold over 500 million copies. Harry Potter and
the Philosopher’s Stone

is the bestselling single novel of all time. With the other six books in the
series all

landing within the top 20 bestselling books of all time. Rowling is the only
author to have more than

one book in that top twenty, and she’s got seven. That has lead to a level of
global cultural

osmosis never before seen in literature. For some kids it was just another book
they

read, or movie they saw. But for many it changed how they looked at

the world. It gave them a safe place to go when the real

world was falling apart around them. There are reports of young Syrian refugees

and South American migrants clutching onto copies of Harry Potter books as they
flee

from the horrors of war or destitution. Because although bombs fall around them,
and

gunshots ring throughout the night… Hogwarts makes them feel safe. And so I
don’t think we can demand people

give that up. As I’ve said already, I know more than a

few trans people who have increased their love of Harry Potter to spite Rowling.
To show her and the people who support her

that they cannot take this away from them. That Harry, and Hagrid, and Hermione,
and

Ron, and the other Weaselys, mean something to them. That Neville and Luna and
Cho and Dean were

their friends when, maybe, they had none. That Molly Weasly was a loving and
accepting

mother figure. That Professor McDonagall was a teacher they

wish they’d had to talk to. If you want to cut this out of your life because

of the things Rowling has said, I do not blame you at all. With countries all
over the world passing

anti-trans laws, adding her voice to the mix has only fanned the flames of
transphobia. But if you want to keep these characters and

this world in your life to spite her, I support that too. Because the minute
those books hit the bookshelves

they became just as much the fan’s property as her own. She might legally own
them, but a brand is

nothing without the fans. There’s an entire generation of people who

grew up escaping to Hogwarts. Who feel comfortable and safe within those

walls… within the pages of the books… or the scenes of the movies. I’m one of
them. And honestly, I’m not letting her have the

power to take that away from me. Will I spend anymore money on the brand?
Probably not. But I’m not letting it go entirely. I accept that she is not who I
thought she

was. But the beautiful thing about books is that,

for the most part, they’re unchanging. Harry still comes from an abusive home,
and

finds his security in a chosen family. Hermione still fights for the rights of
the

oppressed, even though they’re different from her. Molly Weasely is still the
mother figure that

will hug you and care for you, no matter what. Sirius is still the godfather
that will make

you laugh, and put his life on the line for you. Dobby is still the devoted
friend. McGonagall still the caring teacher. Hagrid still the father figure that
will guide

you through the dark. They’re all still there within the pages

and on the screen. Inside a worn paperback or old DVD you got

as a kid or a teenager. And on September 1, you can still return to

Hogwarts without putting a single Knut, sickle, or galleon in Rowling’s pocket.
Rowling did her job. She wrote the books. But They’re yours now. Always.