---
date: 2021-10-04
title: '"Hannibal" and the Appeal of Toxic Love'
status: Script
aka: !!seq
  - "The Gay Appeal of Toxic Love"
  - "Fear Coded (Thumbnail)"
  - "Toxic Gay Love (Thumbnail)"
topics: !!seq
  - "Hannibal"
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
description: "a video essay on <xyz>."
notes: 
  - hbomb
  - commentary

cite:
  clips: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
Horror has always been an inherently traditionalistic

genre, since fear is an inherently traditional, conservative emotion, and horror
is often

used for preserving traditional values: the victory of those who are virtuous,
the punishment

of those who are wicked, and rejection of the “other”. Nevertheless, for
centuries, queerness and

horror have been inextricably linked. With horror relying on queerness for shock

value, and queerness relying on horror for visibility and validation. The horror
genre we know today has its roots

in the eighteenth-century romance and Gothic genres, the more gruesome works of
Shakespeare,

as well as the works of Dante, which described in graphic detail the torments of
Hell that

await those who sin. But the arrival of the printing press spurred

a demand for long-format literature. Enter the Gothic genre, and the growing
dominance

of the novel as the go-to English language prose-fiction format. More demand
meant more authors. More authors meant more voices. Namely, queer voices.
However, we would only step into the spotlight

as one of the few great leading roles we were allowed to fully inhabit: The
Villain. Queer attraction and subtext could suddenly

be explored in works like Sheridan Le Fanu's Carmilla, Oscar Wilde's The Picture
of Dorian

Gray, and Bram Stoker's Dracula, and queer characters could take a role at the
heart

of the story, albeit as predatory monsters with perverse desires. LGBT authors
discovered that we could operate

within the constraints of this most conservative genres, utilizing metaphor and
coding to depict

our queer culture… For a while, it was preferable to be seen

as a monster rather than to go unnoticed. However, in our eagerness to use the
genre

to depict some element of ourselves, we most frequently revealed our
self-hatred, the stinging

toxin gay readers were obliged to ingest in order to fulfill our desire to see
ourselves. Into the early 1900s, through two world wars

and the extremely conformist 1950s and early 1960s, so-called sexual deviation
and perversity

continued to play a prominent part in the horror genre. As novels, movies, and
television became increasingly

permissive, graphic depictions of passionate lesbian vampires, pansexual covens,
mother-obsessed

maniacs, and cross-dressing cannibals startled and titilated mainstream
audiences... while

infuriating censors, and many in the queer community alike. But the anti-hero
was becoming a prominent

protagonist now, and the prim, prudish, heterosexual heroes of the past were
ridiculed for being

painfully boring, while the bizarre monsters and murderers were applauded for
their defiance

of societal conventions. Up until then, families were considered a

perfect microcosm of society. Sacred. A source of power and security. The heroes
would do whatever was required

to defeat the monster and restore order, including sacrificing themselves. But
then a transition took place. We went from 'killing the deviant to save

the family and society' to the insinuation that family and society was where the
deviance

lay, and that they may destroy you. Rosemary’s Baby, Carrie, The Exorcist, The

Shining, and The Omen. In these stories, family and society were

where the monsters were made… through divorce, abuse, or neglect… through
isolation and

exclusion, and especially through a disregard for and degradation of the rules
of gender

and sexual identity that “good families” obeyed. This was the new order of
things in horror. These stories were in high contrast with those

of decades prior, where the monster was still an external force we could fight
and destroy. In recent years, the queer villain/anti-hero

has made an interesting and largely welcome return within horror, as we have
seen an increase

in the psychological complexity of its monsters and the conflicted nature of its
heroes and

victims. Anne Rice’s vampires come to mind as an

example, as well as Bryan Fuller’s TV series, Hannibal. In pervious
horror-themed videos I’ve discussed

the drawn empathy between queer peoples and monsters. We see ourselves in
monsters because we have

also been cast out of society. We’ve been decreed unfit for all audiences,

something we must protect women and children from. We must be regulated, and if
necessary, slain

— for no other reason than how we are different from society’s expectations. So
we look at Frankenstein’s creation and

think, well, I’m also a social outcast, and I have feelings. I have a heart, and
aspirations, social needs,

and dreams of living a good life. Shouldn’t that mean that he does also? But
there’s something that’s overlooked. That queer people are fundamentally the
same

as straight people. And just as there is narcissism, ego, exploitation,

and abuse among straight people — When it comes to queer people… sometimes a
monster…

is just a monster. It’s like we — queer people in our relationships

— are so conditioned to seeing the person behind the monster that we overlook
the elements

that are genuinely monstrous because to us, as historical societal outcasts who
lacked

connection to human society at large, we value the human connection enough to
tolerate or

even condone monstrous behaviour. And yes, we’re always on the lookout for

monsters who want to eat your heart. But far more insidious is the monster that

wants to eat your mind. Your self worth. And we seem to be very comfortable with
those

monsters. Over the course of its three seasons, Hannibal,

lead by out gay show-runner Bryan Fuller, made a significant impact on both the
horror

and crime drama fandoms. With a focus on comprehending the psychology

of serial killers — the driving line of the show was built around learning how
to

develop human connections with people who lack humanity. Empathy for those who
cannot empathize. The emotional through-line of the show, however,

is built around the relationship between the titular antagonist Hannibal Lecter,
and the

Psychological Profiler Will Graham. In the book Red Dragon the story begins, and

the infamous Dr. Lecter — Hannibal the Cannibal — is incarcerated. Will Graham
is recruited by the FBI to track

down a serial killer, and it’s referenced that this is not the first time the
FBI has

approached Will for consultation. Apparently, Will and the FBI had worked with

Hannibal Lecter, who was a practicing psychiatrist, to profile one of a number
of serial killers. Eventually, Will realized it was Hannibal

who was the killer that they were tracking, and Hannibal nearly killed him
before he was

arrested. The result was a complete fallout with the

FBI, and Will himself coping with the trauma for years before Agent Jack
Crawford tracked

him down again to help with a case. But through the mystery of the Red Dragon,

there are constant call backs to Will’s work with the FBI and his twisted
relationship

with Hannibal, which… it’s hinted... that they were much closer than we’re being
led

to believe. The Hannibal TV series for NBC focused around

filling in these plot details. What would a relationship between Hannibal

and Will be like? How did they get to that point in Red Dragon? What did it take
to bring Hannibal down? And most importantly, appropriately presenting

Will Graham in a way that honours his collection of neurotic behaviours that
were outlined

in the book. In the series, Will Graham is a cocktail of

personality disorders, as he describes, closer to autism and aspergers than an
antisocial

personality disorder. Will is able to look at a setting, and accurately

describe an individual based on cues within the scene. Now while this could do
wonders on Drag Race

for reading the other queens— —this has a very practical application for

crime scene investigation. By looking at the scene of a murder, Will

can slip into the mind of the killer. He can observe clues, see the sequence of

the events, and then construct the psychological profile of the person who did
the murder based

on who he becomes while he re-expiriences it. Developing a profile of a serial
killer is

useful in determining how they select their targets. Given how most serial
killers operate, figuring

out how they select their victims could lead investigators to where the serial
killers

live, or intercept them before they kill again. From observing these crime
scenes, Will can

figure out how they think and what they think about their victims. Will, from a
perspective of self-analysis,

reports to the FBI what he feels and thinks when he re-lives the murder. A
psychological profile is constructed based

on who Will says he becomes. In the mythology of the show, Will’s perspective

is second-to-none. Now, for Will, that does mean that he has

to distance himself from his own mind and take on the world view of people who
conduct

very… elaborate crimes. Naturally this kind of identity flux is of

immense interest to Dr. Hannibal Lecter, who first wants to study Will, but then
as he

learns the extent of Will’s ability, begins to feel the need to transform Will.
Hannibal has an unparalleled capacity to read

and interpret body language. Contrast to Will’s ability to construct

human models based on reading environment. He sees Will’s neurotic behaviour as
the

result of Will rejecting elements of his own identity. Hannibal feels that
Will's ability to see

into the heads of serial killers is an indication that Will is drawn to these
people — and

that Will can only be his true self while he is re-experiencing these murders.
The show is ambiguous about whether this is

or is not, in fact, the case. Will seems to adapt his personality to whoever

he is with — so what Hannibal sees may be a reflection of himself, instead of
the real

Will. His interactions with Will are most likely

to be a matter of Hannibal interacting with Will’s interpretation of Hannibal.
But this is the psychology of fictional characters

so take it with a grain of salt. While the show begins as a kind of... best

possible version of a procedural cop drama, the serial killing becomes a vessel
for Hannibal

and Will to connect. Two men who keep people at arms length because

they fear human contact for one reason or another. Through a discourse on why
Will feels the

way he does, he is drawn to someone who offers him clarity of identity. And
through the process of Will empathising

with monsters, Hannibal is comforted in knowing that there is someone who could
and would

understand him. And while Hannibal takes peevish delight in

being beyond comprehension… …Mads Michelson delivers a Hannibal that

is yearning for contact with a human from whom he does not have to leverage
emotional

intimacy with. Now. There’s hardly a discourse to be had here

that actively verifies the textual evidence to confirm that Will and Hannibal
are more

or less romantically engaged. It really doubles down on the gay stuff as

the show goes on, but it was still there in season 1. But I’m not sure you can
qualify it as GAY

representation in its purist sense. Both because the show’s driving relationship

existed in subtext, but also because the development of Will and Hannibal was
focused around empathizing

with people who we maybe should not empathize with. But it’s some of the best
and most insightful

queer coding that’s ever made it into a visual medium. These are two men, coping
with different kinds

of deep-seeded trauma from their youth. They keep themselves isolated and
distant

because they are familiar with society’s fear or disgust with what they are. One
hides in plain sight, holding a shield

of lavish opulence that enchants those around him into believing that nobody
this gentlemanly

and eccentric could be anything else. The other, keeps himself physically
distant,

preferring the unconditional friendship of animals. Brilliant, solitary,
engrossed in their hobbies. They dream of normality, paternity — being

in a family. Though they have both reserved themselves

to their lives, and their fantasies. And when they meet, by complete accident,

they recognize that they see their own fantasies in the other, making steps to
develop their

own kind of family — from the people who need them most. The main difference is
that… one of them

knowingly eats people. And this is just the thing, right? It’s very clearly gay
without saying it

is. In fact, by all accounts, Bryan Fuller fully

intended to give Will and Hannibal an explicit romantic arc. Mads Michelson said
that during the filming

of the last scene of Season 3, he was trying very hard not to kiss Hugh Dancy.
That’s… not acting, apparently. The intention to canonize the Hannibal and

Will relationship may also be one of the reasons why NBC didn’t move ahead with
a 4th season. Because although there were lesbian characters

on the show, lesbians are famously more easy to sell to advertisers. Which is
why you see a lot more lesbian rep

in kids cartoons these days. But gay characters, at least gay lead characters,

are still something that network TV shies away from. It’s that threat of
penetration that creeps

under the skin of a lot of executives and viewers. Subconsciously creating an
unease around gay

men that isn’t there for gay women. At least as long as the gay women look like

this. But in spite of the avid, and continuing flow

of fan art depicting Mickelson and Dancy in compromising postions donning
varying degrees

of undress, I’m not only hesitant to label this as good gay representation, I’m
slightly

resistant to it. God forbid we have a generation of gays who

describe themselves as a Hannigram power couple. What they have, while intense
and fun to watch,

is still… very toxic. You’ve got a know-it-all, gaslighting, mansplainer

on one hand. And on the other, you have a passive-aggressive,

self-victimizing martyr. That should not be relationship goals. And while there
are fans who realize that

no, the point of the show is that you should probably get some help if you see
yourself

as Will and/or Hannibal, there’s quite a romantic drive in the show’s fanbase.
I’ve even seen the show be compared abundantly

to the online comics Killing Stalking and Warehouse, and I see where the take is
coming

from, but I’m not entirely sure that I agree with it. Killing Stalking is a
story about a serial

killer who has complete dominant control over another man. Who explicitly wants
to use and exploit a

literal prisoner. The added twist is that the prisoner is in

love with the captor — or at least thinks he is. This is less about relationship
toxicity and

more a carnivalesque example of abuse in relationships. Warehouse tells a story
of assault and abuse

brought on by childhood trauma. A revenge fantasy of sorts where neither of

the characters are all that likeable, and after an untold amount of torture, the
victim’s

mind breaks. Leading to the victim accepting an actual

relationship with his abuser. In both cases, the power dynamic is all off. One
character has far more power than the

other. But Hannibal functions a little differently. Will is rarely, if ever, a
prisoner specifically

of Hannibal’s. In fact, Hannibal is more often being held

captive in a situation Will had orchestrated somehow. This fits more of the bill
of relationship

toxicity… because Hannibal is never really trying to dominate will. In season 1,
Hannibal’s objective is to

manipulate Will into becoming something that he is repressing. He urges Will to
admit that he enjoyed killing

someone that he had to kill to save another life, and going further in the
series, urges

Will to do it again. Will does not realize that he’s being manipulated

by Hannibal though until Hannibal has already perfectly framed him for the
murder of multiple

people, resulting in Will being sent to a hospital for the criminally insane.
Going into the second season is interesting

because Will has a greater awareness of Hannibal’s methods. He both trusts and
distrusts Hannibal — and,

in an attempt to assassinate Hannibal while he was inside the asylum — Will
demonstrates

that he is willing and capable to take power into his own hands. Thereafter, the
power-dynamic in their relationship

becomes much more evenly shared between them. Each demonstrating that they are
not willing

to tolerate the other’s bullshit. But each demonstrating that they’re going

to keep getting up to their bullshit. And yet… its also abundantly clear that

they would not have this kind of emotional intimacy if they didn’t keep get up
to their

bullshit at all. These kinds of bitchy, catty relationships

are sort of ride or die situations that revolve around a cycle of stockpiling
emotions for

a once-a-year blowout fight. Maybe part of them likes these fights? Maybe they
get bored and tired of people who

don’t play mind games? Maybe they’re self-aware enough to know

that this is just who they are, and they know that nobody else in the world is
going to

put up with them. There are darker sides to us, more intimate,

and personal parts. Little back-brain remnants of feral humans

stuck in our heads. These parts of us tell us to pit ourselves

against each other, seek supremacy, push ourselves into authority, to seek our
own pleasure at

the expense of others. And yet, our society is so tightly constructed

around co-operation, civility, and respecting the other that our feral-brains
are not useful

for existing in this modern world. It is, after all, the co-operation that has

allowed civilization to flourish. We often hide these parts of ourselves. Not
because we’re embarrassed about them,

but because we acknowledge that there is almost no way to function in society by
letting these

internal savage parts of us bubble up to the surface. It’s not just everyone who
we can let see

this part of ourselves. Because by exposing these very closely guarded

artefacts of prehistoric human tribalism, we are letting someone know that we,
ourselves,

are aware that there are parts of us that lack humanity. And while everyone
knows that we all have

corners of our mind that are still overgrown and wild… it is not in good taste
to admit

it. There is always a risk that the person you

trust will point you out as a monster. Hannibal and Will, in this sense, lucked
out

with each other… or… were incredibly unlucky to come across each other. For both
men have a capacity to read beyond

what the other is saying. Their ability to reach each other fosters

a kindred sense of belonging. For lack of literally anyone else who can

understand them, they crave connection in each other. Is this romantic?
Actually... My significant argument about a situation

which separates an abusive relationship from a romantic one is a matter of
power. Who has it in a relationship, and who is it

being taken from. This is pivotal in understanding and interpreting

Killing Stalking and Warehouse. And this is also the case in the first season

of Hannibal… where Will is mostly unaware that he’s even being manipulated. His
subconscious is filling in the blanks

though. However, as Will becomes more aware of who

and what Hannibal is… he begins to make steps to reclaim his power. In the
second season, especially toward the

end, there could be an argument that Will holds the greater amount of power
because

Hannibal demonstrates abundantly that his decisions are reactive to Will’s
actions. But by the end of the series, the question

arises of why Will and Hannibal stay ‘together’ in spite of lying, manipulation,
entrapment,

killing each-others friends, killing their own daughter-figure, tampering with
evidence,

feeding their friends to each other, numerous attempts to kill each other and a
solid attempt

on one to ablate and eat the other’s brain. On one hand, within the mythology of
the show… I just don’t think they’d be that interested

in each other if they didn’t pull this kind of shit. It’s like the Joker and
Batman. What would they have to do with themselves

if they didn’t have this other guy to keep edging them on? Their numerous
attempts to kill each other

could easily be seen as a way of pressing each-other’s buttons to see where the
other

will draw the line at what they are willing to tolerate. But on the other hand…
The alternative is being alone. You’ve let someone in your head, what happens

when you let them out? Yet in spite of the murders and the cannibalism,

Will and Hannibal together establish an even ground where the monstrous parts of
themselves

are in the open. Nobody would ever look past Hannibal’s cannibalism

or art piece murders. But Will does. Will looks at each of the Chesapeake Ripper

murders and thinks: who is the kind of person doing this. While everyone else
thinks what kind of monster

would do this? And similarly, Hannibal is the only person

willing or able to look past Will’s neuroses. Alana Bloom refuses to romance
Will because

she sees a subject. Jack Crawford sees an ace-in-the-hole for

catching serial killers. Hannibal sees a person. So the pair of them can see
past the monstrosities,

and appreciate the human being in the chair across from the other. So naturally…
we, queer people are drawn

to this. Because we, too, want people to look past

the homosexual, the bisexual, the transgender, the genderqueer, nonbinary, fluid
labels that

have been imposed upon us by society and ourselves. We see what Will and
Hannibal have and we,

too, see past the horror of the show, the horrors that they put each other
through. Because it is not the horror we want, it is

the unconditional connection. We can endure horror. Each of us — we already
have. What we cannot endure is solitude. In a discussion of representation, why
would

we clamor for this, and yet leave Love, Simon out to dry at the box office? No
discredit to Ms. Albertalli, but could

it be that queer people do not emotionally engage with a teenage twink whose
dream-style

love story goes off like choreographed fireworks? Most of us have never
experienced that. But a toxic relationship we aren’t willing

to admit is toxic? That’s far more likely. And because of that, are we not more
drawn

to the reflection of the darker part of us? And while we don’t want straight
people

en masse to think of us as cannibal serial killers… we do like to see ourselves
represented. We want to see the darker parts of our lives

staring back at us from the other side of a mirror, or camera. Being gay isn’t
pride floats and kissing

at the top of ferris wheels. And neither is it the suffering that society

puts us through. Not always. When you stick a bunch of traumatized people

into a community, you’re going to get a handful who don’t have the best ways of

coping with that. And as people do, sometimes we just fall in

love with these monsters. And our need for Will and Hannibal to find

a way to co-exist stems from our own memories… wondering if there was any way we
and our

exes could get over our drama and make it work. Because when you find someone
who understands

you… who truly understands you… you want to hold onto them forever… Vampires
have always been a little bit gay. And they’ve always been part of human
history,

believe it or not. Though what we recognize as modern day vampires

is a product of the last five hundred years or so, there are creatures which
could resemble

Vampires going back to Ancient Rome. The Greek Goddess Hecate, a triple deity,

was associated with magic, witchcraft, the moon, the undead, the night, and
wild, forested

areas. She was said to turn women into creatures

which fed off the blood of men. These women would either be vicious monsters,

or keep rural roads and paths safe for travelling women. Hecate herself was a
later addition to the

Greek Pantheon, and some scholars believe she was the Greek adaptation of a
goddess

that may have originated in Egypt or what is modern day Turkey. Egypt itself
possessing a version of vampires. Though these figures being less monsters and

more the result of a society which religiously revered a rigorous relationship
between life

and death, and the pathways to and from either. Blood is one of the earliest
symbols that

humans associated with the concept of life and death, for obvious reasons. It’s
not a stretch to say that our earliest

societies would have had a fixation on blood’s symbolic ability to transfer life
from one

to another. In these days, vampires didn’t need to be

gay because everybody was gay. And then Christianity took off for… a hot

minute and then before you knew it everything that was interesting about human
culture was

a sin or a demon. So Vampires became more monstrous than they

already were. The vampire especially was a symbol of distance

from God’s natural order. Which… wasn’t much of a difference from

the way vampires had previously been depicted violating the natural order of
life and death. Because it used to be you only went to hell

for committing cosmic treason, cheating death, direct acts of warfare against
the Gods, or

actively trying to end the world. But these days, eternal damnation awaits you

for something as easy as masturbation. And while once Vampires were beasts and
monsters,

beholden to the whim of their associated deities, vampires in christian
orthodoxy were creatures

who had simply strayed from God’s plan and protection. As a result, they
resembled not only monsters,

but men and women who embodied the antithesis of the good christian citizen.
Ranging from cannibalism, sexual perversion,

and vast displays of opulence. But it was never something explicitly explored

— instead vampires lived within folklore as parables preaching the need to stay
away

from people who exhibited un-christianly behaviour. The 18th and 19th centuries
marked a shift

in the way many people in Europe examined their heritage and mythology.
Additionally spurred by the advent of the

printing press, allowing an ease-of-access for increasingly literate
populations, European

writers grew tired of dramatic wealthy families and war stories. Attention
turned towards fantasy stories,

science fiction, a more gripping and tangible expression of imagination. And
particularly, a re-examination outside

the rigid christian moral take of European folklore. And within this, we began
to decode the queerness

of the vampire. Even if we were just using vampires to call

out our queer friends for being jerks. In 1819, John Polidori published The
Vampyre. In this story, the vampire, Lord Ruthven,

is written as an aristocratic seducer. A rich man who has given up the idea of
following

society’s norms. This was a great fear in western Europe at

the time, by the way, especially among poorer people. The catholic church had
maintained power for

nearly 1500 years thanks to a propaganda effort that said that poverty was
pivotal to morality

and getting into heaven. The more accepting the poor were with poverty,

the less likely they would be to rise up against the wealthy and powerful. And
it meant the church got to decide who

got to be wealthy and powerful. Yet the projected messaging, and this was

heavily adopted by the poor, was that excessive wealth was the most pivotal
component in distancing

oneself from propper sexual conduct. Specifically, homosexuality. But Palidori
wasn’t writing about the corruption

of homosexuality, oh no. His Lord Ruthven was, quite obviously, the

real life Lord Byron — who… may or may not have been a vampire himself. But he
was fabulously wealthy, fabulously

sexy, fabulously bisexual, and who Palidori had been fabulously in love with for
a time. But Lord Byron got bored, and casually moved

on to suck the life out of some other, less talented, sycophant. Which normally
wasn’t a problem, but Palidori

was salty enough that he was gonna tell the world just what kind of sexy…
irresistible

monster Lord George Gordon Byron actually was. And probably also how Palidori
would take

him back in half a second if Byron came around. We all know a guy like that,
don’t we? Later on in the century, In 1871, a vampire

story with — let’s say... ‘subtle’ lesbian undertones — “Carmilla” by Sheridan

Le Fanu, was published. The idea of a vampire female presence was

nothing new, but one preying on other women was revolutionary 

and scandalous. Feel like I could get demonetized for that. And then came
Dracula by Bram Stoker, who

many believe to have been a closeted gay man in love with his employer, Henry
Irving, who

many believe was the progenitor of the character of Dracula, himself. For this,
Stoker himself was a young, impressionable

Johnathan Harker, trapped in the castle of opulence, alone, with a man worth his
obsession

— kept from his benign relationships with women. Dracula’s most famous screen
incarnation,

the 1931 adaptation, which is actually adapted more so from the play than the
book for budgetary

reasons, was directed by Todd Browning, a gay director. And he made his Dracula
sexy, exotic, and

fabulous with that flowing cape. Throughout the mid 20th century vampires fell

into the realm of b-movie camp, having more than one meet-up with Abbott and
Costello. And though many a gay man found ample sexual

tension between Christopher Lee’s Dracula and Peter Kushing’s Van Helsing in the
Hammer

horror classics, there wasn’t much to speak of gay vampires in mainstream
culture at the

time. If you want more on Dracula’s queer coding,

my video Monsters in the Closet goes more in depth on that. The pre-Stonewall
era for gay men in American

society was mostly a time of repression, fear, and the darkness of the closet.
It was a time of conformity not just for gay

people, but everyone, who were expected to play their role in order to keep
America safe

from “Godless Communists.” Senator Joseph McCarthy and his notoriously

closeted right hand man Roy Cohn (and others of their ilk) were hunting not just
communists

but gays as well. There were congressional hearings aimed at

rooting “sexual perverts” out of government jobs, and surveillance of the
American postal

service for gay magazines continued until 1966. The Lavender Menace knew no
bounds. Finally, as the 60’s hit its stride, the

sexual revolution began to take hold, and the Stonewall riots forced mainstream
America

to deal with the existence of gay men and women… it was only a matter of time
before

the gay vampire returned. But this time he wasn’t a monster, but a

hero. Ironically, a Byronic hero. After the tragic loss of her young daughter

to leukaemia, an aspiring San Francisco based writer named Anne Rice began
dealing with

her grief by writing about creatures that could, potentially, live forever. Now
before we get TOO far into Mrs. Rice I

want to cover the sticky subject of her opinion on fan-fiction, since I know
it’s a hot

button issue. The Anne Rice V Fan Fiction war began around

the release of her novel Merrick, at the dawn of the e-book revolution. Her
publisher, believing physical books were

dying, wanted to publish Merrick as an e-book exclusive release. And so they
told Rice that any fan fiction

available online would cannibalize those ebook sales, advising her to file a
cease and desist

against all fan fiction websites. The e-book exclusive of Merrick ended up doing

absolutely terrible sales, because e-books were not taking over the world and
most people

barely even knew they existed at the time, and so a physical copy was eventually
released. But, due to some advice from her publisher,

Anne Rice has been known as the lady who hates fan-fiction ever since. Even
though in 2012 she said: However, Rice’s adventures in publishing

began much earlier than Ebooks and the internet. In her premier novel, Interview
With The Vampire,

she used these creatures as sympathetic heroes. Through them, she conceptualized
both the

concepts of death and the illusion of immortality. However, her vampires weren’t
going to get

weighed down with all that coding and subtext brought about by Christian
conservatism. Her vampires were gonna be here and (mostly)

queer. As a woman who lived in San Francisco, and

who openly engaged with queer elements of The City in the 60s and 70s, she took
on by

osmosis, the internal lifestyle struggles of the queer community. Their lives,
their heartbreaks, and the ways

that their ostracised existence generated problems that would not typically be
seen

or understood in straight circles. But Anne Rice was going to make straight
people

understand it… by making them vampires. Vampires who, in spite of being
monsters,

she made you sympathise with. Published in 1976, Rice’s first novel: Interview

With The Vampire, tells the story of Louis De Point Du Lac, an immigrant to
America in

1791, who ran a plantation just outside of New Orleans. A happy man, he cared
for his mother and sister,

as well as a younger brother Paul, a very religious man who claimed to see
angelic visions

regularly. After an argument in which Paul told Louis

that the Virgin Mary had come to him and told him to sell the plantation, Paul
accidentally

died, though some believed it was suicide, and others believe the he’d simply
seen

god. Louis took to drinking to cope with the grief,

and moved to New Orleans, not really caring for this whole ‘life’ thing much
anymore. Which is when he met Lestat De Lioncourt,

a vampire who grooms Louis into accepting the dark gift himself. Eternity in the
night doesn’t really…

make Louis feel any better though, naturally. His eternity began while he
thought of nothing

but the loss of his loved one, and for the rest of his eternity that is who he
would

be. While Lestat tries to win Louis over with

gifts and companionship, their relationship develops with an unhealthy amount of
gaslighting. And once again we see a pair of men slip into

a codependent relationship where neither is particularly welcome anywhere else
but each

other’s company. For Lestat, this arrangement offers him a

feeling of importance, and someone he can ‘fix.’ And for Louis, this arrangement
offers him

someone who can make him feel anything at all. And though they enjoy being with
each other,

to a point, what they dislike is that they have no other option but to be with
each other. Who else would accept them? Who else could? It doesn’t help that
Lestat is consistently

rolling his eyes at Louis because this boy still hasn’t gotten over his catholic
hang-ups

and refuses to drink the blood of another human. Just rats. When he finally does
drink from a person,

it’s a lonely, dying girl who’s weeping over the corpse of her mother who had
died

from the plague. He nearly drains the girl and then flees. Only to find Lestat
waiting for him at home

with the girl, ready to turn her into a vampire so that Louis and he can have a
daughter,

Claudia. So they can be the gay dads! It takes some convincing but Louis gives
in,

creating a daughter who will never physically age. Because like every other
couple who shacked

up together too quick to find the magic fading just as fast, they think a child
is gonna

fix everything. Claudia herself grows up, trapped in a child’s

body though with the temperament and desires of a grown woman. Over the years,
she fosters positive relationships

with her fathers, drawing close to either for different reasons. She is more
gentle and nurturing than Lestat,

and empathises with Louis over their shared trauma — the loss of family. And
yet, she gives into the darkness where

Louis wont, going on nightly hunts with Lestat for human blood. But, as time
passes, Louis and Claudia decide

that Louis really needs to break up with Lestat. That’s he’s abusive, and gas
lighty, and

needs to go. And so they kill him. Well they kill him a few times because he’s

a vampire and he doesn’t take to death well. They don’t even manage to kill him
when

they do kill him. Why? Because Lestat is a bad ass bitch. But they do manage to
escape to Europe, where

they hunt around for other vampires like them, eventually finding a troop in
Paris lead by

Armand, who in the books is a Ukrainian teenaged twink described as: But in the
movie is… Antonio Banderas. Slight difference in interoperation, really. But I
understand it would have been hard to

have this scene between Brad Pitt and a sixteen year old boy. One might wonder
why Anne Rice would create

a vampire so young and yet so adult as Armand? But once again, Anne Rice was
writing in 1970s

San Francisco. How many gay and trans teenaged runaways would

she have met who could have told her forty years worth of life experiences, with
an emotional

wisdom of someone even older? Because as is common with her vampires, they

carry a kind of trauma with them. Oftentimes, they are vampires because of their

trauma. And yet, like us, they treat each other as

their trauma demands. Either they inflict it on each other, or they

fear exposure to others, letting their trauma twist and manipulate others away
from who

they are — to fall in love with the facade, never to let the face underneath see
the light

of day. And… these vampires hurt each other. Louis does not and cannot trust
Armand. And Armand, in turn, hurts Louis. Claudia dies, and the mask of
immortality

shatters, and even Armand is no longer a child, but a monster whose gruesome
visage is a youthful

face which conceals centuries of schemes and horrors. Paradise lost. Anne Rice
let her Vampires rest in peace for

nearly ten years after that book. But then, following her writing Cry to Heaven,

a very bisexual book about the castrati of Italy, and the Sleeping Beauty Books,
which

basically explore every kink and sexual orientation imaingibale. We finally got
the sequel to Interview with

the Vampire… The Vampire Lestat. Typifying that there are “two sides to every

story”, we have Lestat’s take on the events that Louis had described. But while
John Polidori’s Vampyre was marred

in queer subtext, Anne Rice was over that shit. No subtext. No bachelors living
together with ambiguous

shared parental responsibilities. Lestat’s queer. He’s gay. That’s it. He’s gay,
he lives with his boyfriend, and

they’re theatre queens. Lestat leaves his crumbling family estate

to live with the love of his life, Nicolas de Lenfent, who he lovingly refers to
as Nicky. Nicky is a musician, and Lestat is an actor,

and they live together in Paris helping to run a small theatre. And they’re not
best friends. They’re not roommates. Rice makes it abundantly clear that they
are

lovers. When Lestat is turned into a vampire by his

suicidal maker, Magnus, he hides from Nicky. Scared that he’ll be rejected. But
Nicky believes that it is Lestat who had

rejected him, even though Lestat sends him expensive gifts like a Stradivarius
violin. The abandonment that so many of us in the

queer community fear sends Nicky into a spiraling state of depression. When he
finally does meet with Lestat once

more, he begs to become a vampire. At first Lestat refuses though eventually

gives in, but while turning Nicky he senses the darkness in Nicky’s soul that
has developed

because of his depression. He can feel the love of his life slipping

away, even as he holds him closer than ever before. After becoming a vampire
Nicky becomes nearly

catatonic, and eventually slips away from Lestat entirely. And after centuries
of dealing with depression

and severe mental illness, Nicky kills himself. In a later book when Lestat
travels to heaven

and hell— (Yes this happens. Maybe, sort of, it's complicated.) —he searches for
Nicky’s soul but can’t

find him in either realm. Leading to many years of solitude for Lestat,

mourning the complete and utter loss of his Nicky. Lestat and Nicky aren’t the
only queer characters

in The Vampire Lestat though. Most of the characters seem at least queer

adjacent, but the one that stands out the most to me is Gabrielle, Lestat’s
mother. After becoming a vampire, Lestat turns his

sickly mother as well. Upon her birth as a vampire, Gabrielle takes

on the appearance of a man, wearing only men’s clothing and courting women.
Becoming, arguably, a trans or gender queer

character in the mid eighties. She and Lestat stayed together for a long

while until just shortly after the French Revolution when she leaves him. As
Rice’s vampire novels, which became known

as The Vampire Chronicles, continued, the overall pansexuality of vampires was
further

explored. Since any vampire can seemingly fall in love

with any person, no matter their sex or gender expression. Male characters are
often referred to as beautiful,

while women are called handsome. Rice has spoken about her depiction of gay

vampires: Anne Rice created a world that the queer community

felt wolcomed into, and one we felt we knew. One of characters perceived as
monsters by

many, and fetishized by others. Where living forever was a possibility, but

where some vampires would go insane because of being alone. And that even for
the brat-prince Lestat himself,

the anxiety of being alone is palpable. It’s no surprise that anxiety is
prevelant

in the queer community. We’ve been outcast for one reason or another

— even those of us who are accepted by their families. Members of the queer
community feel a desperate

need for connection. For community. For knowing we’re not alone in the world.
Much like Louis and Lestat travelled to Europe

and Northern Africa to find others like them, in their respective books, we too
search out

others like us. But we’re not always welcomed into the community. We don’t
always find the fabled found family. And so when someone does come along… even

if they’re monstrous, we may attach to them out of necessity. And never let them
go. We may change ourselves to be what they want,

and ask only for their company in return. This is especially true for
marginalized communities

within our marginalized community. Queers who live with disabilities, or who

are mentally ill. When being queer isn’t the only reason someone

might not love you, we’ll hold on to whatever and whoever we can get. No matter
what they do to us. No matter how little we mean to them. Because at least we
mean something to them. As we engage with our media, the relationship

between queer people and monsters becomes stronger. There’s always been a
component of monstrousness

in the inner circles of queer spaces — specifically in the areas of kink, drag,
and performance. It should come as a surprise to no one that

the booming popularity of adults going into mouth-foaming frenzies for halloween
arose

as queer people began receiving social and political recognition Queer people
have a fascination with costumes

— and this is something documented for most of our time in recorded history. As
social outsiders, there’s nothing more

appealing than becoming someone who is publicly accepted. Even if that costume
was just a plain old

normal person. When what’s under your skin is decried as

being freakish, you begin to see everything as a costume — especially the
conventions

of society that are taken for granted. The business suit. The Sunday dress. The
fake smile. The things you wear to fit in with the straights. Alternately, where
once we were artists, creators,

rule breakers in our day to day lives, now our creativity and rule-breaking may
be tolerated

for certain events. Halloween. Pride parades. Certain fairs where we can be
ourselves. And then there are the… twinks and gym bunnies

who put on a jock strap and harness and dance on some tables. A costume all its
own. A problem with focusing so clearly on Halloween

and pride week as spaces where ‘true selves’ are acceptable is that we are being
harassed

out of being our ‘true selves’ for the rest of the year. If you’re so excited
for pride week so that

you can be a seven-day slut, why are you so ashamed of sexual promiscuity for
the other

fifty-one weeks? Obviously, this is how you want to live your

life — why are you tolerating only ONE week where this behaviour is
‘permissible’

or even only tolerable by straight social-gatekeepers? Modern manifestations of
queer circles are

facing these struggles, as the cisgender-heterosexual hegimony imparts more and
more statutes for

conditional tolerance. You can be accepted, but only if you can check

off A, B, and C on the application for public recognition. This is just a more
nuanced version of outrightly

shutting out these identities and lifestyles as a whole. Instead, SOME queer
people can naturally fit

into these parameters. Others will force themselves to conform for

the sake of social comforts and conveniences. Others are either unable to
conform, or refuse

to. And why should they have to? Forcing hegemonistic spaces to remove
restrictions

on a social definition of personhood — rather than broadening an
increasingly-complex cataloge

of valid identities — should be the main objective of queer rights, I think.
Instead, we record and document every sub-genre

of sexuality and gender — deciding who can be valid and when. Instead of just
realizing it’s nobody’s

business and letting people live their lives… we are relegating queer
noncomformists to

exist in the shadows. And in the shadows, there are always monsters. Given that
queer circles at large were once

forced to live in the shadows, maybe this is why we’ve always been drawn to the
monsters

within them. There’s also a theatrical element to the

beast, isn’t there? An ethereal fantasy constructed around the

Alfar of northern europe. The strength and poise of the faefolk of the

Celts. Oberon, The Earlking, and their court of nature

spirits of southern France and Germany that survived the collapse of the Roman
Empire. All stories banned by the authority of the

Catholic Church. And each figure recategorized as a servant

of Satan. But the nature of our secret, solicit meetings

facilitated an exchange of ideas between the rich, the educated, and those
lacking in either. Why wouldn’t the young, poor, rentboy growing

up on the streets of London be enchanted by pillow-talk lessons of creatures and
heroes

from an era where same-gender attraction was not so taboo? In which case, I may
be suggesting that our

love of monsters — both academic and fetishistic — is a matter of carrying on
the stories

and traditions from pagan cultures where our identities and expressions of
sexuality did

not hold the same taboo, as it has for the last fifteen hundred years. This
proves to us that a world can exist where

we can live without homophobic and transphobic baggage. Our freedom, our pride,
does not need to be

fiction because our ancestors got by just fine without homophobia. We see that
homophobia is in contradiction

to social cohesion, progress, social institutions, trade, commerce, or family
structures. Maybe that gives us hope that it could be

different one day, or that we could eek out our own existence where we can make
this once-truth

a present day reality. The need to build a community has translated

into the trope of found family. Which itself is a defense mechanism from — to

this day — living in a world where your family may push you out if you don’t fit

their checklist of acceptable identities. Found family wasn’t intended to be a
fiction

trope about a plucky group of misfits coming together for a shared purpose. It
was necessary for queer survival — not

for the survival of our community… no, actual survival of individuals. The
alternative was filling the streets with

disowned and desperate queer youth. And if there is one area where fiction and

reality overlap, it’s that monsters feed on desperation. There are quiet corners
of queer history that

we’ve omitted from the discussion at large. These are specifically rooted in
white colonial

circles; and subsequently focused on a dynamic of privilege, power, and
exploitation. Given that queer identity for a large section

of history was, itself, illegal, there were almost no legislative protections
that queer

people would have been able to seek out. Doubly true is that law enforcement
itself

has had a history of targeting queer individuals and whole communities alike. A
gay street kid who gets assaulted by an

established, closeted man has no legal recourse. But even more unsettling are
the ways that

we, as disowned and desperate people, tolerated these abusive partners simply
because the

alternative was a never-ending cycle of shelters, dark allies, and drugs. As an
example, the culture of the ‘houseboy’

had been a staple of the gay community, and to some, an indication of status and
success. Wealthy gays taking on young gay men, offering

room and board in exchange for eye candy, performing household chores, and
sexual favours. The latter of which would often be extended

to friends and guests, at the patron’s whim. The end result was a
socially-accepted precedence

for a power dynamic that exploited vulnerability. That isn’t to say that all
those who provided

shelter to younger gay men were predatory. That also isn’t to say that all of
these

arrangements violated consent. But the fact that it was so accepted as
status-quo

is what should be troubling. But the power dynamic within the culture certainly

made for an enticing opportunity for some — to match the monstrous elements of
themselves

with the perceived success that home-cleaning concubines indicated to other
queers. We may never know the degree of exploitation

that has occurred within this very community. Because there are good Samaritans
in the world,

who do aim for the comfort of others. But for each one of these, how many are
there

who get drunk off of having a desperate boy at their mercy? The monster, after
all, does not know it is

a monster. A monster is as they have always been: they

do what is natural to them. And it is those outside who place labels on

the monster. Or, are we so desperate to live out these

monster fables that we seek them out? We want to be both damsels in need of
rescue,

and also chrome-clad knights. And it may not be the princess or Prince we

want to save from the monster, but the monster from itself. Through the process
of wanting to redeem the

monster in ourselves, we may seek out other monsters who neither see the need
for their

own redemption nor do they feel that they do anything requiring redemption. With
them we remain, sinking into habits and

patterns, where their monstrous behaviour becomes our normal over time. And
those watching us simply cannot understand

why. This is by no way something only present in

queer circles, but we tend to frame our lives in ways that mimmic the media we
watch. We see these squabbles, these fights, these

struggles play out over a few seasons of television, or over the course of a
film. We feel this immense fulfilment over seeing

a satisfying conclusion, over the resolution of drama, the poetic justice of
everyone finally

understanding your side of the story, after the evil monster is recognized as a
sympathetic

man. And everyone just decides to forgive and forget

the ways they hurt others. But Real life doesn’t have a plot. Real life does not
have a resolution and nor

will there ever be. Not as we’d understand it. So our attempts to find meaning
and significance

in what happens is a matter of us superimposing our own understanding of
literary devices

and dramatic licence upon the events that happen around us in real life. And
always in a way which feed into our own

story, our own character development. And some of us want our story to be about

turning the beast into a prince. I can’t think of a single queer person who

has not gone through some kind of abusive relationship – and that’s even outside

our garden-variety trauma. We all have that one ex who, if they didn’t

outright abuse us, treated us like they were the most important thing in our
lives. Like we couldn't exist without them. Some of us have more than one, of
course. And yet… we all know exactly why we stuck

around for so long. Why we tolerated the behaviour, the treatment. Because the
alternative was being alone. The alternative was not being understood. Even if
the alternative was not explicit rejection,

maybe it’s just as bad to earn indifference. And regardless of the behaviour…
That one person ‘got’ you. They understood you. In fact, that kind of emotional
proximity

is exactly why they were able to twist you around the rusty nails they pounded
into your

heart. They knew where your heart was… when nobody

else cared enough to look for it. And leaving them? Even if you did find
somebody else… would

they ever understand you the way the monster had? Human survival has depended on
establishing

connections with others. So how can anyone say that it’s your fault

for craving that connection with a monster over no connection at all? So much of
queer horror is about the aspects

of our culture that straight people fear, that straight society fears: women's
strength

and independence, men's vulnerability and intimacy, the upending of gender and
family

roles, the rejection of the primacy of reproduction, the hollowness and
bankruptcy of the dominant

social structures, and challenges to the Church's pronouncements. And our
inherent invisibility, our cunning—that

we might be anyone, anywhere, lurking in plain sight. I have to confess, there's
something delectable

about the fact that we would cause so much anxiety, and anguish, and
unreasonable, unwarranted

fear simply by existing. There seems to be great power in that. Aside from the
obvious, what are queer people

terrified of? Of course, we are scared of death, as well

as violence, torture, sickness, and suffering, as well as being exposed,
humiliated, shunned,

and persecuted. We are concerned about being erased, unseen,

or forgotten. We're terrified of being alone. But being queer is sometimes about
all of

those things; they are at the heart of our history and the source of our
oppression. Being queer sometimes means being cast out;

other times, it means casting ourselves out, walking or running away from
abusive families

and partners while we still can. Being queer sometimes means being the
sympathetic

beast. Frankenstein’s monster. Just yearning to be left alone. To live our
lives. Depending upon where in the world you live

being queer can mean losing your family, your friends, your religion. The
pillars of society that held you up and

now you’re left alone, forced to fight for yourself because sometimes no one
else is

willing to fight for you. Like the victim of a slasher movie, you’ve

watched as everything and everyone you held dear drops around you. But there’s
strength there. Because sometimes, after everything and everyone

has been stripped from us, sometimes being queer means being the last one
standing.