---
date: 2021-11-18
title: Hollywood's (Gay) China Problem #｜ James Somerton
status: Script
aka: !!seq
topics: !!seq
links: !!seq
  - "https://archive.org/details/james-somerton-youtube-2023-12-03"
description: "a video essay on <xyz>."
notes:
  - hbomb

cite:
  clips: !!map
  plagiarized: !!map
---
Doing videos about gay representation in movies

and TV on a regular basis for about a year and half now, I’ve gotten a lot — and

I mean a lot — of comments from people trying to explain to me that the reason
movie studios

dont put gay characters in their movies isn’t because of American or corporate
homopboia. It’s not because they want to appease right

wing Christians. And it’s certainly not because they know

they can get the gay money without creating any real gay representation. No. The
real reason they don’t give us gay action

stars and super heroes is “China.” They usually refer to it as the country as

a whole, too. As if every single person in China signed

a letter to Hollywood demanding no gay characters in movies or TV. Instead of
the reality of it being the Chinese

government. You can check the comments of any video I

make that mentions Disney and you’ll find hundreds of these people explaining
this to

me. That I simply don’t understand the politics

of Hollywood or the business relationship the industry has with China. Well, I
figured that since I actually have

a degree in film and another degree in business, maybe I could actually explain
this whole

situation in a bit more detail than you’d usually get in a YouTube comment.
Because it is true that the Chinese government

has very anti-LGBT policies across the nation, and they’re VERY not fond of any
LGBT representation

in media… and both sets of policies are actually becoming more draconian with
each

passing day. But what you might be shocked to find out

is that Hollywood is not required to bend to the will of the Chinese government
in order

to make a profit. In fact, the Chinese government is making

it less and less advantageous for studios to be their whipping boys. And we’re
gonna get to that... But first, let’s have a look at China’s

odd, winding journey into the film industry. So the first thing we need to talk
about is

the box office, and how much money movies make while in theatres. When studios
report the projected box office

earnings of any given movie, usually on Sunday but sometimes on Monday if it’s a
long weekend,

you’ll see the gross amount the movie made by selling tickets at movie theatres.
That number will be broken up into two different

sections. Domestic, which includes the United States,

Canada. And International, which is everyone else. And then they’ll be combined
for a Global

gross. Gross being the most important word here. In business terms, “gross
income” is how

much is made before deductions, “net income” is how much is made after
deductions. Which, for most people, that means the Net

is how much money you get paid after the government has taken its taxes, and
you’ve paid your

health insurance, and all that. The gross is always a much nicer number than

that. Now when it comes to movies, studios never

EVER report the net income because that represents how much profit is made by
the movie. And if they report the profit made publicly

that leaves them open to things like paying higher taxes. A lot of actors also
have points on a movie,

which means they get a certain percentage of the profits. Jack Nicholson
notoriously got points on 1989’s

Batman, and publicly admitted to never having to work again if he didn't want
to. But that’s not the only reason movie studios

don’t report net revenue from ticket sales. The other, arguably more important
reason,

is they don’t get to keep all of the ticket sales from the get go. Movie
theatres take a giant chunk of that. It tends to be different per studio and per

movie, with Disney demanding the highest percentage of the box office returns,
but it works out

to be around 50/50. Studios will get a higher percentage when

a movie first comes out, and the percentage will shift into the theatre’s favor
the

longer a movie sticks around in cinemas. So sometimes it’s not exactly 50/50,
but

that’s the average. And that’s not even getting into the fact

that marketing and distribution costs aren’t calcuated into that figure. Some
movies have advertising campaigns that

cost as much as their production budget so they’d need to make 4 times their
budget

before they make a profit. It can get so complicated that it’s no wonder

there’s an actual industry term called “Hollywood Accounting.” Yeah it’s mostly
to hide money from the

government and people with profit participation, but it’s also because you need
to be a special

kind of accountant to wrap your head around this whole thing. And that’s just
the studio side of it. The theatre side can get complicated too. That’s why
you’ll see a lot of theatre

chains have special popcorn buckets and soda cups available for big new movies
on opening

weekend. And charge a surcharge for them. They want you to buy these things,
which they

put a giant mark up on, so that they can bring in more revenue at a time when
any given movie’s

ticket sales will be mostly going to the studio. Some theatres, before the days
of Covid anyway,

would also charge extra for assigned seating. That extra money would go
exclusively to the

theatre, since they’re charging a convenience fee on top of the initial fee to
see the movie. And this has been the way that Hollywood worked

for a really long time. Ever since the supreme court decided that

movie studios were no longer allowed to own theatre chains. Which was a big
thing back in the day. Studios would own whole theatre chains and

only show their movies there. So if you lived in a small town and your local

theatre was owned by Paramount but a Fox movie was coming out that you really
wanted to see,

well, you were shit out of luck. Better hope it ends up in a second run theatre

in a few years. But then, in the case of The United States

v. Paramount Pictures in 1948, it was decided that studios could no longer own
theatres

and so this new 50/50 split was eventually worked out. This will be changing
soon though since the

Justice Department under the former Trump administration decided to toss out the
Paramount

Decrees so in August of 2022 Disney will be allowed to buy as many theatres in
the United

States as it wants. But, for now, that 50/50 is still in effect. And it’s all
across the globe. Europe, South America, Australia, and most

of Asia works under the same principle. But then a fly landed in the ointment
and

started messing things up. A gigantic fly called China. Filmmaking had taken off
in China in the 1930s

when Chinese filmmakers, sick and tired of Hollywood’s racist and offensive
depictions

of the Chinese people, began making their own feature films. But After the
communist revolution of 1949,

domestic films that were already released and a selection of foreign films were
banned. Despite this though, movie attendance increased

sharply. But then during the Cultural Revolution, the

film industry was severely restricted, coming almost to a standstill from 1967
to 1972. But in the years immediately following the

Cultural Revolution, the film industry flourished as a medium of popular
entertainment. Production rose steadily, from 19 movies in

1977 to 125 movies in 1986. And the numbers of films just kept rising

from there, though a pretty big chunk of the movies released were actually
propaganda films

financed by the Chinese government. Following the international commercial
success

of films like Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon and Hero, Hollywood started to take
notice

of the growing power of the Chinese market. And so they began a campaign to have
more

and more Hollywood movies released in China, which the government at the time
was more

than willing to let happen because it helped the nation feel further legitimized
by the

international community. China wasn’t a communist backwater nation

like North Korea. It was a growing economy with happy citizens

who wanted to enjoy films from all over the world. How happy their citizens
really were is up

for debate but that’s the narrative the Chinese government propagated. At first
Hollywood was actually able to negotiate

pretty good terms with the country. Something closer to a 40/60 split, with
Hollywood

studios getting 60% of the box office returns. But as the Chinese box office
began growing

year over year, the Chinese government began to renege on those agreements,
forcing studios

back to the negotiating table, sometimes twice a year. Whereas studios would
sign decade long contracts

with American theatre chains. All of this lead to today, where China reportedly

keeps a whopping 75-80% of the box office returns. With studios getting as
little as 20%. There’s no public financial data for representing

this because, again, studios like to keep how much their movies make, and where
that

money comes from, as secret as possible. Lest they be forced to pay their share
of

taxes. But people in the industry who work on the

financial side of things seem to have loose lips, and they’re more than happy to
talk

about how China is screwing over an American industry. Now 20% is better than
nothing, right? Avengers Endgame made $629 million in China,

so 20% of that is about 126 million. Nothing to sneeze at. It’s not the 315
million Disney would have

gotten under a 50/50 agreement but it’s not nothing! But Endgame may have made
even more money

in China. See, Chinese theatre chains have been known

to be a bit sneaky. Tourists visiting the country and going to

see movies while there have seen ticket sellers take your money for a Hollywood
movie, ring

up the sale as a ticket for a Chinese propaganda film, and then wave you on
through. These reports are all independent, and there’s

no financial data reporting this, again, so take it with a grain of salt, but it
seems

to be reported... a lot. In fact a lot of people who work in the industry

are pretty convinced that China fudges their numbers all the time. Avengers
Endgame had been the biggest opening

weekend of all time at a domestic box office, with 357 million dollars in the
US, and Canada. A record most industry professionals were

convinced wouldn’t be broken for years. But then, earlier this year, Detective
Chinatown

3 opened in China to a reported opening weekend of 400 million dollars. These
numbers weren’t released by any studio

or production company, of course, they were announced by CGTN, China’s Global
Television

Network. Basically their English Language propaganda

channel. The news wasn’t even announced on local

Chinese news, only the English Language variant. Making it pretty clear that it
was a dick

wagging move, allowing the Chinese film industry — and by proxy the Chinese
government — to

flex how well they were doing economically, while most of the rest of the
world’s cinemas

still stood empty because of COVID 19. And since there’s no way for Hollywood
studios

to confirm these numbers, they’re just forced to take the Chinese government at
its word. So not only is Hollywood getting a fraction

of the money from China that they do from the rest of the world, now China is
basically

making the argument that while Hollywood apparently needs China, China doesn’t
need Hollywood. In recent years Chinese audiences have also

shown a reticence to Hollywood movies, choosing Chinese-produced films instead.
Leading to more and more domestic Chinese

films being produced, leading to fewer theatre screens being available for
Hollywood movies,

leading to even less money being made in China by American studios. Suddenly
that 20% number isn’t sounding

all that great. The Chinese Government, via their censorship

bureau, is also making it increasingly difficult for Hollywood movies to get
released in China

at all. In November of 2016, China passed a law banning

content deemed harmful to the “dignity, honor, and interests” of the People's
Republic

and encouraging the promotion of “socialist core values," approved by the
National People's

Congress Standing Committee. So basically any movie that portrays China

in anything but the most glowing light will be banned immediately. Studios began
trying to get around this by

working with Chinese Production companies to ensure that a movie would meet the
specifications

set out by the government. Such as Alibaba Pictures, Wanda Media, or

Legendary Entertainment… a company that was originally an American company but
after

years of investment from a Chinese production house, Wanda Media, the American
stakeholders

lost control of the company to the Chinese investors. Once Wanda Media reached
50% plus one of the

voting shares, they took control of the company and fired the American
executives. But even when studios try to work with Chinese

producers, that doesn’t guarantee success. It just leads to movies doing well in
China,

with possibly inflated returns thanks to those wonky ticket sellers I mentioned
earlier. But then... doing worse in the rest of the

world because everyone else sees the movie j**king off to the Chinese government
and

is a bit… turned off. This has been happening especially obviously

with the Fast and the Furious franchise. 2017’s Fate of the Furious, a Chinese
co-production,

made 226 million dollars in North America, but 392 million in China. Another was
Alita Battle Angel, with 85 million

in the US, and 133 million China. Transformers: The Last Knight made 130 million

in the US, and 228 million in China. This is becoming more and more common.
Meanwhile Hollywood, especially Disney, who

got spooked at how poorly the new Star Wars movies did in China (which honestly
was likely

because the original trilogy was never released in the Middle Kingdom), have
been trying to

make movies specifically for China. The live action Mulan and Marvel’s Shang

Chi come to mind. But Mulan only made 40 million dollars in

China, and Shang Chi, to this day, still hasn’t been granted a release. While
not officially stated by the Chinese

government, it’s likely because the movie’s star, Simu Liu, publicly spoke about
how his

family fled China for Canada. And China doesn’t want that kind of back

talk. That’s also why, assumedly, Marvel hasn’t

balked at the gay relationship in Marvel’s Eternals. They’re not cutting it out
for countries

in the middle east who demanded it, for the most part. Those countries have
since banned the movie. They didn’t cut it out when Russia demanded

it. They just ended up giving it an 18+ rating. So why has Marvel grown such a
back bone all

of the sudden? Well. Because The Eternals never even had a chance

to be released in China because director, Chloe Zhao, who was born in Beijing,
left

China to make movies in Hollywood. An act China will not soon forget, and so

her movies are now verboten there. So why worry about appeasing the Chinese
government’s

backward policies on LGBT representation, when you know it’s never going to get
released

there anyway? And even if they did agree to release it,

who’s to say that they wouldn’t “sell” you a ticket for Eternals but count the
sale

for a domestic propaganda movie like The Battle at Lake Chanjin, a war movie
released in China

in September of this year. About Chinese soldiers overcoming the odds

and defeating American troops in Korea. It’s apparently grossed 858 million
dollars

so far. Just in China. During a pandemic. And is, as of now, the highest
grossing movie

globally of 2021. …Allegedly… And maybe all of this is for the best. Maybe once
China is out of the equation, Hollywood

will lose its excuse for not creating more LGBT characters. But the funny thing
is, if the Chinese people

actually had a say in it… we’d probably have more gay characters in movies than
we

already do. One of the things I notice a lot when this

topic comes up in comment sections (and really, I can’t afford a therapist so at
the very

least I need to stop going into the comment sections), is that people seem to
think that

Chinese people are inherently homophobic. That the very sight of two men kissing
makes

them vomit in rage! Well! Have I got news for you, dear viewer. Have you ever
heard of BL? It’s the less creepy way of saying “Boys’

Love”, which is a genre of movie, tv show, comic, and novel that’s taking parts
of

the world by storm. And one of those parts is China. The government wouldn’t be
instituting “no

gays in movies” laws if they weren’t seeing gays popping up in a whole lot of
other places. So what is BL? Well, I’ll differ to an expert. According to Manga
Planet: “Originating in Japan, Boys’ Love or BL

is a literary genre or media depicting the romance between male characters.
Commonly referred to as “yaoi” by overseas

fans, from books to fan fiction, manga, anime, and video games. BL stories tend
to be written mostly by women. Boys’ Love began as fan works by women fans.
Later in the 1980s, yaoi manga expanded from

fan groups to mainstream media via anime or OVA (original video animation)
adaptations. Since then, Japan has produced yaoi media

through various platforms.” The internet propelled the global growth and

popularity of Boys’ Love, as non-Japanese fans were finally able to read
translated

BL manga. And one of the largest markets for it... was

China. Subtle gay dramas and love stories, adapted

from boys’ love webnovels, have become a very lucrative business in China. But
even with the censorship laws, the appetite

for queer content is just too big to ignore. A demand that comes mostly not from
gay men,

mind you, but straight women. At least eight shows adapted from novels with

boys’ love romances premiered in 2021 across China’s major streaming platforms.
The stories range from historical-fantasy

action flicks to modern mystery thrillers and teenage melodramas. Making and
showing BL dramas in China is a

tightly wound tight rope act between the profit-driven entertainment industry
and the homophobic

censorship of the Xi Jinping regime. In 2016, the hit teen series Addicted (also

known as Heroin), a drama with explicit gay scenes premiered. It grabbed the
attention of the Chinese government’s

censors when it first aired in January of that year. The first episode garnered
10 million views

in the span of 24 hours setting the record of the highest number of views on the
first

day in China's streaming television history. In less than a month, the series
reached over

100 million views. It became a massive trending topic on Weibo,

basically Chinese Twitter, with the show’s hashtag being viewed 849 million
times. But then on February 23, all episodes of the

show were removed from all Chinese video streaming websites three episodes
before the season

finale. This was by the order of the NRTA, or National

Radio and Television Administration, due to "the gay and explicit content". The
show is now impossible to view or access

via mainland China’s internet. The last three episodes of the first season

were uploaded to YouTube a few days later to make them accessible to viewers
outside

of mainland China. The censorship of the series sparked rampant

criticism. Online discussions on Weibo with the hashtag

"removal of Addiction" received more than 110 million views within a day of its
cancellation. The Wall Street Journal and Time Magazine

even published articles about it. But despite the Chinese government’s best

efforts to erase the show from existence, it’s gained a huge following outside
of

The Middle Kingdom, and a second season is coming soon, but production and
distribution

will be done in Taiwan. A country where the BL genre has become an

industry all by itself. But I think that’s a different video. In 2018, the
sci-fi drama Guardian went offline

two months after its release, even though the original gay romance storyline was
re-written

as a friendship to try to appeal to the censors. They didn’t care about the
rewrite though

because Chinese viewers were shipping the characters whether they were written
gay or

not. Before it was banned, Guardian had already

pulled in over a billion views. The potential for some serious money encouraged

companies to continue with the BL genre in China, but with a more understated
tone that

could possibly bypass the government censors. The 2019 fantasy series The
Untamed, featuring

an unlikely bond between a man with magic powers and a stoic prince, started an
online

craze over the pair’s implicit romance. But the show’s promotion focused on its

portrayal of Chinese traditional culture — a push consistent with Chinese
Communist Party

propaganda. The show was queer baity, but the novel on

which it was based certainly was not. That featured a very explicit love story
between

the two main characters, but was self-censored when adapted to meet the
censorship guidelines

of the Xi Jinping government. But it didn’t matter. Like so much queer baiting
before, people

saw through the weak venere of heterosexuality. They took the bait, so to speak.
The series has accumulated a total of 9.5

billion views in China, as of this summer, and had also received an
international release

via Netflix. It was described as a global phenomenon, taking

off like no BL series before it. Making its way all around Asia and, with the

Netflix deal, all across Europe and North America as well. TenCent, the Chinese
streaming platform it

originated on saw 2.6 million new subscribers to the service when it was
released. And WeTV, an app that lets you watch BL content

anywhere in the world, saw growth of 250% while the show was airing. In January
2020, the cast members planned

to embark on a multi-city worldwide fan meetings tour. Cities included Bangkok,
Singapore, Tokyo,

Seoul, Macau, Kuala Lumpur, Toronto, Los Angeles, New York, but it was cancelled
due to COVID19. Even the Chinese government has endorsed it. The overseas
popularity of these romantic

sword-wielding heroes is often highlighted in Chinese media coverage, focusing
in on

the massive overseas streaming numbers and its ability to build a growing
appreciation

for the charm of Chinese culture. Meanwhile, production houses and streaming

sites have snapped up the adaptation rights of other popular BL novels. Priest,
author of Guardian and Word of Honor,

will see at least four more of her novels adapted into live action series or
movies. Knowing viewers jokingly call the homoerotic

relationships in these dramas “socialist brotherhoods,” a reference to how
on-screen

homosexuality has to be disguised as bromances in line with official state
ideology. I’m surprised that moniker hasn’t been

taken up by some of my subscribers, to be honest. But the rise of BL in China,
sadly, doesn’t

mean the Chinese government is going to soften its stance on LGBTQ rights
anytime soon. For all its appeal to homoeroticism, the BL

business in China survives by avoiding any discussion of these rights while
focusing

on the physical attractiveness of its male characters. Ge Liang, a researcher at
King’s College

London said: “By hinting at male homoerotic love, the

directors and actors are appropriating the interest of… gay life, trying to turn
these

into cash and traffic. But instead of speaking up for the LGBTQ community,

they stay in line with China’s official policy on gay people: ‘keep them silent

and keep them sinful.’” Most gay people in China still face prevalent

discrimination in households, schools, and workplaces. But these struggles are
invisible to the public

eye, as state censors ban almost all representation of obvious homosexuality in
mass media. In 2018, a writer was sentenced to more than

10 years in jail for writing and selling gay erotica. However, some members of
the gay community

see BL dramas as a precious platform for queer stories. Where Chinese state
media often portrays gay

men as enemies to traditional values, and sources of social instability, subtle
BL dramas

have perhaps become the best form of queer representation in China’s
state-sanctioned

pop culture. But in March of this year, just as new series

Word of Honor earned an impressive score of 8.6 out of 10 on review site Douban,
an op-ed

published via the state-run News Agency warned against the “negative influence”
of BL

on impressionable teenagers. Many feared this signalled an imminent crackdown

on the genre. And then… The Chinese Government officially banned any

representation of men in media that did not fit perfectly within the ideal of
masculinity. No more bromances. No more coding. No more lingering looks or soft
touches. President Xi Jinping has called for a ‘national

rejuvenation,’ with tighter Communist Party control of business, education,
culture, and

religion. Companies and the public are under increasing

pressure to align with its vision for a more powerful China. Which… if you look
to your history books,

when a country starts locking down the media and attacking a very specific
minority group

as being the propagator of all the nation’s ails, as the Chinese government is
now doing

with what they describe as ‘sissy men’... That usually means the government is
on the

ropes, whether we see it publicly or not. Someone might be asking: well why is
the Chinese

government so obsessed with clamping down on removing gay representation — from
their

media? Why does any political body specifically target

a removal of queerness from media? It seems to be kind of a weird and arbitrary

thing to hate on, right? If you wanted a strong natoional sense of

unity, why would you specifically target one group of people — specifically a
group of

people that cannot be culturally erased because more gay babies are born every
day. You could argue that the reason is because

a totalitarian state is interested in population expansion. Queer people can be
seen as a population limmiter. Especially if a nation is engaged in expansionism

or involved in regular military conflicts. But when it comes to China… they have
population

control mandates. As well as the fact that The People’s Army

isn’t publicly engaged in any hot conflicts right now. As well as it would
simply just be easier

to have mandatory in-vetro pregnancies for lesbian women, and mandatory sperm
domantions

from gay men. Alternatively, you could argue that many totalitarian

regimes tend to lean on scripture and religious doctrine as a means of
controlling a population. There’s no better way to get someone to

live their life a certain way, than by telling them they're going to go to hell
if they don't. For all eternity. Or better yet, dangle afterlife rewards
programs

in front of them. As it so happens, gay people aren’t really

compatible with MOST modern religions in the world… But China is a Maoist
Communist state, and

as a result has banned most religious practices. Dictatorial theocracies are
kind of hit and

miss control method though, because what inevitably happens is one group of
extremists pop up

and declare that another group isn’t being extremist enough. And splintering is
what regimes like the one

in China tend to avoid. Keep in mind the methodology of control in

a dictatorship is to unify public, military, and commercial thought into a
single national

direction that all feeds into consolidating the power of the dictator. The
reason why Soviet communism banned religion

was because they recognized that not only did religious freedom afford
opportunities

for diverting power away from the state, but also created a precedent for there
to be power

above the state. And if a religious figure can convince you

that God wants you to defy the state, then the state is in trouble. You only
really see theocracies in smaller

countries, both in terms of population and sheer geographical size. In order to
assure that the people associate

the religious order with state mandate, you usually need a strong martial
presence. Which is much harder to organize in a significantly

large nation. This should illustrate just how delicate dictatorships

actually are. In order for the state to function, everybody

in the nation needs to be doing what the state wants them to do. Given that the
state is meant to function

as a well-oiled machine, there isn’t a whole lot of slack for, say, a workers
strike. Take this however you want, but... if your

economy tells you that it can’t possibly survive a workers strike, you just
might be

in a totalitarian regime. In most cases, having a nation that is divided

in its thinking means that the state has a diminished capacity to predict and
plan the

movements of its own people. It’s also just more efficient. If you’re going to
the gas station for a

slushie run, it’s easiest if your 10 friends all like blue. But if your friends
all want something different,

you’re going to need go in with a list. Or, you could just tell everyone that
blue

is the only colour available. If it’s the only colour they think is available,

of course it’s going to be their choice. Complete unity is the objective – it’s

difficult to control a billion people. But it is much easier to control one
culture

shared by a billion people. The stronger the cohesion to a singular culture,

the easier it is for the state to plan and predict social, economic, and
cultural movements. So how does all of this relate to gay censorship? Consider
how much of our society is built

around different milestones of life. When you graduate from high school. When
you get married. When you buy a house. When you start having children. A lot of
us don’t even realize these are

milestones, and we don’t even realize they’re optional. All those articles about
how millennials are

destroying the housing industry because we’re not buying houses, the car
industry because

we live in cities and take public transit, the napkin industry because we use
paper towels,

or the diamond industry because we’re not getting married as young as we used
to. Those are based on these expectations about

how people are ‘supposed’ to act. Not feeding into these industries when we

were expected to is a huge disruption in how these respective industries project
what their

profits will be. Now take China, and instead of picturing many

different industries, see China itself as an industry. In order for China to
function, the state

needs as many people in the nation as humanly possible to conform to a very
specific collection

of roles and identities. The more people deviate from that singular

identity, the less control the Chinese government has to properly manage those
people. And that’s why queer people, by nature,

challenge the state’s ability to expect and predict the behaviour of it’s
people. In our modern society, queer people have existed

on the fringe of society for thousands of years. As a quasi-legal, sometimes
entirely illegal

class of people, we mostly don’t feel a need to conform to social standards and
milestones. There’s no reason to get married in your

early 20s because getting married at all wasn’t an option. Queer people, thus,
don’t need to buy a

house in the suburbs to have children. We don’t need cars if we live in the
inner

city. Domestic appliances? We’re cooking for one. We didn’t get engaged, so we
don’t — or

we didn’t used to — buy rings. Take a moment to consider how disastrous this

is to a society that is constructed around buying things at certain times in
your life,

under certain expectations of how you ought to live. And not only that, but each
queer person can

have a vastly different set of expiriences from the next and therefor gravitate
to different

lifestyles. Queer people — within ourselves — lack

unity as a subdemographic. For a governing body which requires a homogenous

population in order to consolidate power, we are a bit of a nightmare. And it’s
for this reason, neither baby making

nor religious bigotry, that China in particular clamps down on queer people.
Increasing the available ‘accepted’ identities

in a given society adds an incredible layer of complexity when it comes to
managing how

this population ought to behave. One unified culture means that this one culture

only needs one media stream to project messages toward. A state-sanctioned
heterosexual romantic comedy

which contains pro-state messaging will be received and absorbed by straight
people — because

they want a relationship like the main characters have, they model their life
after the main

characters. (This is in incredibly simplified terms but

you would be amazed at how easily media can influence your actions, so this
isn’t much

of a stretch.) If queerness is an acceptable identity, then

queer people are not going to identify with that messaging in that heterosexual
rom com. Then the state needs to make a separate media

stream to accommodate queer people — a media stream that will not be absorbed by
straight

audiences. In a pragmatic sense, the state is spending

twice as much money to project the same pro-state messaging to two different
audiences. How old should gay people be when they get

married versus how old should straight people be? Synchronising both of these
messages and assuring

that they both feed into state power consolidation is quite a task. And far less
efficient than projecting one

message to one homogeneous social group. Limiting the available identities that
a citizen

can occupy is totalitarian regime 1-0-1. That dates back to the earliest
empires. Rome, for instance, owed its success in no

small part to a very rigid, very narrow, range of gender identities, family
roles, and a

very limited class mobility. As the state could trust that a Roman man

in Italia would hold the same social values as a Roman man in Germania, they
could plan

and predict how large sections of provinces would respond to legislation and
taxation. As it so happened, same-sex intimacy wasn’t

strictly incompatible with Roman family structures. But Rome also entirely
demanded slave labour

to function so maybe this isn’t a fantastic social model to look up to. And it’s
not like gay persecution is limited

to “left wing” totalitarianism. China is undergoing a similar process to America

in the 1950s. A very pro-free market, pro-white, pro-straight

process that came to be known as McCarthyism, named after senator Joseph
McCarthy. The legacy of McCarthyist crackdowns was an

intended plot to root out any communist or socialist ideology from America,
under the

guise of rooting out Soviet spies. Which… was not all that successful. They
caught a lot of people who fed information

to spies… but they didn’t actually catch a lot of those actual soviet sleeper
agents. In reality, McCarthyism was an effort to distinguish

the cultural identity of ‘propper American’ people. This is when you got all
those info-videos

about how to live your life, which got weirdly specific. How to hold a family
meeting. How to be a popular teenager. How to go to the store. To say nothing of
sexual education manuals

directed to young women. Anyone who behaved like the people in the

videos was a proper American. Those who did not were possibly ‘communists’

and should be reported to the authorities for investigation. At the time,
America was convinced that their

capitalist way of life was under constant threat, and were informed by the
government

that even one ‘non American’ living in your neighbourhood could be a threat to
national

social cohesion. But McCarthyism didn’t stick in America,

simply because singular power consolidation was conflicting with American
party-politics,

freedom of religion, and the free market which began to capitalize on artistic
formats which

McCarthy considered to be non-American. Black music and art, gay men in
hollywood,

women in publishing. There were simply too many channels of media

for the state to regulate and countermand. The Chinese government’s saving
grace, thus

far, had been the proverbial iron curtain that separated global media from
Chinese audiences. The state can control what media the public

receives, the state can dictate what a ‘proper citizen’ is. This is why Hong
Kong was such a problem ($ubt!tle$

8locked) So it’s not like China is deliberately opening

their captured audience to the rest of the world. It’s just getting easier for
the media to

move fluidly across borders without a government’s consent. Chinese creators who
travel abroad may return

to China with fresh perspectives and want to include facets of life beyond what
is strictly

sanctioned by the Chinese government. And as the government cracks down on
representation,

they find more clever ways to code it into the media, while still checking off
all the

other boxes for praising the state. Like The Untamed. But for some reason, even
coding queerness

is too much for China now though. As I’ve said, Chinese law about
representation,

specifically in line with gender roles and expressions of masculinity, have
strange implications. Right now, actors and creators from South

Korea, Japan, Australia, and even China are flocking to Taiwan and Thailand,
which right

now stand at the dual seats of a media empire for producing BL content. Comics,
novels, movies, television shows. There is so much BL media coming out of Taiwan

and Thailand, that you need a website catalogue to track it all. And there’s
plenty coming from other Asian

countries as well, but Taiwan and Thailand seem to be pumping out BL content
faster than

Disney pumps out Star Wars and Marvel combined. China shares a lot of cultural
identity and

history with these countries too… broadly speaking. And given the massive
amounts of cash that

China hands out through its arts programs, you’d think that China itself would
want

to capitalize on BL the way Thailand and Taiwan have. The international outreach
would be positive,

and ultimately garnish a lot of goodwill from queer audiences, for softening
their pespective

of China and Maoism. Not to mention the financial return. So why is China not
engaging? Because control over their own population

is more beneficial to the legacy and stability of the state. A citizen may ask:
“If it’s suddenly okay

to be gay… what else is okay?” And it may very well be that the people of

China are starting to ask those kinds of questions. China’s new media laws —
which also apply

to forigen media shown in China — crackdown on gender roles in a way that is
both specific

and very generalized. For instance, a man cannot be depicted as

effeminate in any way now. Which is always difficult to gauge because

there’s a question of what kind of man are you talking about? Is this man
sensitive enough to hug his children? Does he cry? Does he cook? We know that
two men touching in any way is

strictly off-limits. And given how successful China’s subtle

approach to censoring gay content has been… this seems a bit heavy handed. Or…
maybe it isn’t as successful as we

believe. I’ve met a few gay men from China, both

online and in real life. And when it comes to the topic of queer acceptance

in mainland China, I’ve been told it’s more or less an ambivilant issue. No,
it’s not strictly socially accepted,

but homophobia is more about not wanting your own children to be gay — because
of legacy

— but no effort seems to be given to open bigotry toward gay people in general.
And bear in mind, this is… absolutely not

an adequate sample size to gauge the overall attitude of queerness in mainland
China. And is focused mostly on cultural attitudes

in urban centres. And also limited by the individual perspectives

of the people I’ve spoken to, and the kind of people that I am likely to
encounter. So take this less as hard statistics and more

of a glimpse into the possibility that we, in the rest of the world, may not
have the

clearest idea of what the Chinese people, themselves, are comfortable with. To
say nothing of the… throbbing statistics

that demonstrate very clearly that the Chinese people are comfortable enough —
with at

least gay men — to fully support BL content... when it has been produced.
Because the new crackdowns on identity tell

me that something very precarious is going on in China — and that the government
is

struggling to maintain social unity. They’re seeing splinters and groups which

lean towards inclusive lifestyles. That they see the people becoming comfortable

with fragmenting subcultures. And so in a nation where the state controls

all media in the hopes that they can use media to control the people, they are
placing much

tighter constraints about what messaging the media can depict. In other nations
which influenced the population

with propaganda, this was always a red flag... that the culture of the people
was developing

in a way that did not align with the state’s agenda. And Hollywood is just
another shred of evidence. As Chinese laws become tighter and tighter

about what kinds of depictions of men can be screened in China, Hollywood is
going to

have fewer and fewer films that are going to be able to qualify. Not to mention,
more competition with Chinese

films, fewer screens in Chinese cinemas, and a smaller and smaller cut of the
Chinese box

office. The rest of the so-called ‘modern world’

is pushing for more diversity. For a deconstruction of typical gender roles. So
Chinese interests of the state are putting

Hollywood in a very strange situation: conform entirely to Chinese demand for
the chance

that China will, first of all, screen your movie, and second of all, report
accurate

box office numbers. Or… Hollywood studios can simply make movies for

(most of) the rest of the world. I think that we, the queers of every damn

country on this planet, should take pride in the fact that in a lot of cases in
the

last thousand years, the big focus of crumbling fascistic regimes was also queer
people. We’re a bunch of homos living our lives,

and yet we represent one of the single most pivotal disruptions to
dictatorships. Shouldn’t it be an awesome feeling that

we have that kind of power to automatically disrupt authoritarian control? That
our very existence runs so antithetical

to a government controlling its people that they have to turn propaganda into a
science

to suppress us? They’d never admit that we have that kind

of power but their actions say otherwise. Every morning when you wake up and go
about

your queer life, you are inherently shaking the foundation on which
dictatoriships are

built. Because they have shown that totalitarianism

cannot exist when queer people exist alongside it. But unlike fascists and
dictators, we don’t

fall. No matter what the church, or politicians,

or world leaders say… We remain. When Rome fell, we were still there. When the
church started losing influence,

we were still there. When the fabled thousand-year-Reich collapsed,

we were still there. And when this anti-queer Chinese government

sees its last days, we will still be there. We’ve always been here. We’re always
going to be here. Remember that.