cars is a Disney Pixar animated film released in 2006 and was the seventh film
released by Pixar Animation Studios this film followed a string of emotionally
evocative and intellectually stimulating films just two movies after the
industry changing Finding Nemo the success of the studio was predicated on
taking the typical gimmicks of Hollywood animated movies and subverting their
juvenility with examinations of emotional depth creative visual Direction and
Stellar voice acting Pixar defied all expectations that each subsequent film
would fall short of its predecessor even a sequel to their debut movie Toy Story
2 was Far More Than Just a shallow reprisal of all the same themes of the first
in a period of Hollywood history when sequels were Hollow Recreations of their
prior installments for the Studio's early history it seemed that they were the
real deal that even if they were directing their films primarily to be
accessible to all ages they would treat animation with dignity and integrity in
spite of being a subsidiary of Disney Disney after all at the time was looking
for ways to collect Prestige without diluting the Disney brand as per their
offshoots of Touchstone pictures and Miramax Pixar was granting them Prestige
and animation that typical cartoons could not however as Disney's in-house
animation projects began to flounder does anyone remember Home on the Range they
needed to perpetuate that good old dizziness somehow lucky for Disney Pixar was
about to allow the mouse's brand into their studio with cars which from the
initial ads audiences pegged as it being a little more corporate when it was
released it was decried as soulless and not really having any other purpose but
to sell toys and in spite of the success of Pixar's other films Toy Story
notwithstanding cars was the first to get a sequel which is interesting because
it also has one of the least impressive box office performances of any
pre-pandemic Pixar film and indeed whatever Soul the first movie had the second
one had less effectively accomplishing nothing but giving Larry the Cable Guy a
feature-length stand-up gig and confirming that 911 occurred in the cars
Universe which means that the car's Cold War existed which means that there was
a car's nuclear arms race which means that cars World War II happened which
demands the existence of cars Hitler and subsequently the car's assassination of
Carr's Grand Duke Franz Ferdinand which through the car's Holy Roman Empire we
can only extrapolate that there was a Bubonic plague in the cars universe as
much as this may seem tongue-in-cheek it's highlighting a very key problem that
developed in Pixar whereas before they would take a concept like monsters in the
closet or ant hill politics and build a world around that the studio used
absurdity and scale to either integrate the plausibility of their plots into our
world or like The Incredibles would dismiss plausibility and cultural
identification altogether for this reason cars seemed half-baked was it in this
world or not where was it drawing from our history and where was it just kind of
doing its own thing but of course that mattered less than selling cars
merchandise which when you look at how much money cars merchandise has made next
to every other stream of Revenue at Pixar it's clear exactly why cars got two
sequels and a slew of spin-offs and this would have been dismissable as a
project to appease the Disney overlords who needed to push merch off of those
Disney store shelves like any parent lacking responsibility skills when Disney
drops the ball one of their kids has got to pick up the slack it would have been
dismissable if this wouldn't be how Pixar would continue to treat its projects
between Cars 1 and 2 Pixar released a trio of prestigious juggernauts Wally up
and Toy Story 3 which earned Disney by proxy a long coveted best picture
nomination one for Dad three for fans it seems like an acceptable ratio Brave
was the second time that Pixar was really seen as bending their Creative Vision
to appease Disney after Wally the last of the original five Pixar Concepts to be
released Brave was closer in concept to a Disney princess movie than Pixar's
established brand and indeed Merida is included in Princess merchandise Disney
got what it wanted a stop Gap after Tangled and the Princess and the Frog
underperformed so they could sort out what to do with frozen which was then an
adaptation of The Snow Queen and in cold development hell Pixar began to
incorporate more human Focus stories into their features the long-awaited sequel
to Finding Nemo was closer to Cars 2 than Toy Story where the CIA sequel was
built entirely around a takeaway character from the original and the original
protagonists were more or less abandoned and it's not that Pixar is making bad
movies or that their messaging is lacking but it seems that they're leaning on
gimmick storytelling to do a whole lot more of the heavy lifting like Bing Bong
from inside out who from the second he was on screen was read as an emotional
Pawn who was only there to make the audience cry but then there are movies like
Coco onward Luca and turning red which again were not bad movies but it's not
really clear why these were Pixar movies because they seem like Disney movies
especially with the mouse leaning into plot beats and styles like Big Hero 6
zootopia Ryan The Last Dragon and Encanto it's hard to really qualify why these
latest Pixar films seem so distant and to a large extent it might be that Disney
is just trying to be more like Pixar but it does feel like Pixar is taking notes
from the top developing stories where it is less about a cast of personalities
and more about generating settings that younger viewers could imagine themselves
in they focus more on showing this world to the audience there's a spectacle
made of the creative process rather than passively depicting characters
interacting with the world and trusting the audience to pick up on the
defamiliarization they also focus more clearly around Coming of Age whereas that
wasn't really the primary theme of a Pixar movie until Brave which is absolutely
Disney's wheelhouse we're not likely ever going to get another story about a
lonely robot where the first half of the movie is entirely without dialogue and
leads an entirely New Generation to discover why Hello Dolly put an end to the
original Hollywood musicals but the most important distinction is the scope of
what these films are discussing contemporary Pixar films discuss
self-actualization emotional growth personal development and interactions
between the self and Society again Disney's bread and butter nothing new as far
as animation goes however the reason early Pixar films stood out so firmly is
that they handled more macro themes A Bug's Life spoke to the power of
collectivism against a smaller class of oppressors Monsters Inc was about the
moral bankruptcy of Corporations Wally was about the invested interest of
keeping an entire population docile independent The Incredibles and Ratatouille
in spite of being made by Brad Bird have different things to say about classism
which is unfortunate because a lot of people grew up taking notes about
individual exceptionalism from this raging Iran fan personal plot beats are
present in all of these films but characters are secondary to what the film has
to say about Society at large even in earlier Pixar films that do focus on
characters topics and themes remain more abstract Toy Story routinely discusses
abandonment issues and related trauma dictating who is or who is not useful to
social structures up focuses on demystifying the idea of Youth being the time to
have Adventures and Finding Nemo was more directed at parental anxiety even cars
was about learning how to slow down and appreciate the little things in life
that empathy and integrity can and should go a lot further than chasing the next
big deal or the next big paycheck pay attention we're going to come back to that
later these days Pixar films seem to align a lot more with what Disney is
comfortable with Coming of Age Family Values friendship spectacles set pieces to
show off just how much those computers can render Etc honestly Encanto feels
more like a Pixar movie than anything that Pixar's produce lately and no it's
not subtle what's going on leaks from staff at Pixar are all indicating that the
studio is under more and more creative pressure to fit into the Disney mold
especially because in spite of tanking staff morale Pixar has now in large part
been moved to the exclusively for streaming part of Disney plus and believe me
this does have a lot to do with the process of creating Independent Media Pixar
as a studio should be seen as maybe not a cautionary tale because it still is
where animator's dreams come true and in spite of their creative shift they are
producing Stellar content we're not talking at all about the quality of what's
being made we're talking about the creative process behind how it's created guys
it's okay to like Pixar movies please do not go to the the comments and say that
I'm trashing Pixar I am not but this should be seen as just what happens the
more a creative Venture gets Tangled into a large corporate structure Pixar
Animation Studio has its roots in Indie filmmaking the technology was developed
in large part by George Lucas even though each one of the Star Wars Movies
featured the 20th Century Fox logo each one with the exception of episode 4 was
financed and produced independently by Lucas himself until Disney got them
following Star Wars Episode 6 he sunk his hands ever deeper into the technology
that makes sound and visuals he is one of the co-founders of THX which everyone
who lived in the 90s and 2000s will recognize as the logo that told you to turn
your volume down he didn't really like working for Studios but he did like
working with other filmmakers famously the Raptors in the kitchen scene of
Jurassic Park was animated as a digital technology Flex by industrial Light
Magic George Lucas special effects team meanwhile some Cinema Empires can't be
bothered to properly composite Mark ruffalo's head into a scene for one of the
most expensive cinematic projects of all time through this process Lucas toyed
around with using computer technology to make animated shorts he abandoned the
project to ramp up his work on the Star Wars prequels in the 90s where instead
he would be the guiding force on pioneering Digital Cinema he was also a
consultant for digital effects for the Lord of the Rings movies so no he's not
just the Star Wars guy he sold the Pixar technology to Steve Jobs who in turn
sold it to Disney while maintaining a strong creative control over the studio
the 2011 death of Steve Jobs also lines up with Pixar's creative pivot Pixar
sets a unique stage for this reason as it has been both in a tour driven
Animation Studio while also a cog in the machine of a much larger art as product
product as art media Corporation but specifically why are we talking about this
when the image in the thumbnail is from a web series about cussy horny depraved
murderous demons in an environment where sexual deviances of the norm none of
those words have ever been in a Pixar movie and with the exception of murder
they're not in the Bible either having described how Pixar's content manifested
as per its relationship with corporate oversight what does that have to do with
a hard R rated animated series on YouTube called hell of a boss [Music] um
foreign hell of a boss is a show created by Vivian Medrano in 2020. the show is
technically a spin-off of an earlier series she piloted called has been Hotel
it's closer to say it's a spiritual successor while the shows exist in the same
universe they share few other overlapping elements and are thematically distinct
a key difference is the inclusion of Internet celebrity Brandon Rogers as
leading voice talent and a major contributor to the series in conjunction with
medrano's Signature Care to setting and emotional development hell of a boss
stands out even among Network animated series the premise of hell of a boss
follows Blitz the O is silent as he runs a business which offers services to
damned souls for a nominal fee the immediate murder professionals are just imp
or imp will zip on up to the world of the living to get revenge on behalf of the
now dead person usually this involves killing whoever the client blames for them
being in Hell imp is made up of Blitz Moxie and Millie a happily married couple
and Blitz is adopt furry I mean hellhound daughter Luna as much as Moxie in
particular Longs for appropriate work-life boundaries Blitz insists on having a
family environment at work ironically the one person who actually wants to be
around Blitz is someone who he is constantly trying to give the slip Prince
stolis one of the principal rulers of hell is head over heels for blitzy stolis
himself is a little bit of a late bloomer to love and gay sex having lived most
of his life in a Loveless marriage that he's only put up with for the sake of
his daughter Octavia as a Croatia either a variation of demon or a dynastic
family stolis possesses a grimoire which can open portals to the Mortal realm a
book that blitzy needs in order to get paid so in order to borrow it from stolis
he needs to give the prince of Hell The Jerk around to keep him hooked just
enough while still being able to avoid emotional intimacy but because the book
ultimately belongs to stolis Blitz does kinda have to toe the line stolis does
on a few occasions demonstrate why nobody should really get on his bad side just
your average pissed off bottom stuff really the nature of the plot forces Blitz
into a situation where he can either choose to abandon what seems to be a last
resort career or to confront his attachment problems we're getting into spoilers
now go watch the show it's on YouTube you have no excuse as with all of
medrano's content on her channel vivzipop the series is rot with gratuitous
cussing gratuitous violence and most of all gratuitous genderblind sexuality
which the first two are nothing particularly new for cartoons and even explicit
sexuality isn't anything too shocking for those of us old enough to remember
that drawn together was once a thing but the degree to which errant gender is
depicted is something that stands out from the norm even in comedic animation
where queer people are included we're usually just the butt of the joke
[Laughter] this is Hell after all it makes perfect sense why all the Purity
rules we hold would be inverted there there isn't even an everybody is bisexual
or pansexual angle either it's relatively clear that where some characters have
no preference a character like stolis simply doesn't have much interest in women
whatsoever the fact that he's leaving his wife for a man is not scandalous the
Scandal is that he's leaving her for a lesser demon in hell where degeneracy is
not only the norm but the social expectation the only Real Taboo seems to be
affectionate monogamy it's a whole new fetish called normally Moxie and Millie
frequently have to face jeers and criticisms about their relationship though
really they they could they could stand to tone it down just just a little bit
the thing that is shocking about hell of a boss however is the very strange
uncompromising quality of the writing Under The Gallows humor there is a strong
underline a very Salient emotional beats consistent characters and recurring
plot themes which challenge these characters yes the plots are outrageous and
the setting is outlandish but when the series wants to be it can be shockingly
real for instance in the show about horny violent demons I was caught off guard
when an entire episode ended up being dedicated to exploring the way that
children may internalize their parents divorce why does he hate a bull that he
loves me it's fairly common to see media where children spiral through their
parents divorce at least in media where divorce is depicted at all which is
still shockingly infrequent as per actual divorce rates the depiction usually
focuses on how children go a little sideways due to family cohesion breaking up
or some kind of abstract reasoning like that however this is also media which
depicts parents as being much better at keeping their emotional [ __ ] away from
their kids I've spoken with a few people who were either ambivalent or relieved
when their parents announced that they were moving ahead with separation
children are shockingly good at picking up that their parents just aren't vibing
with each other and parents are shockingly bad at assuming their kids aren't
going to pick up on the needling each other over dinner hell of a boss's Octavia
has been living in this home environment for some time and although she does not
seem that upset about the divorce itself her concern is that the divorce is
going to drain the life out of her parents so they won't have anything left for
her which is quite the nuanced depiction especially when it would have been
easier to just depict the easy route especially now that we're into the second
season of the series the creators seem more comfortable with depicting these
kinds of interactions gotta get the audience hooked with the sex and violence
first though it's rare that an animated series is allowed to go both ways there
is Saucy adult animation meant to push boundaries like Rick and Morty or
well-developed animated dramas like Slice of Life anime usually when networks
approve any kind of series they want things to be able to fit neatly into
categories this way it's easier to qualify what kind of media is successful
because if you're operating off of a numbers only situation it's impossible to
isolate what elements of a piece of media make it successful the media in
question cannot be reduced to the sum of its parts because quality in media is
more about how these parts interact it's why Marvel sticks to the Marvel formula
they found something that agrees with audiences but which has quantifiable
elements that can be controlled through several layers of executive oversight as
long as their media sticks to this pattern they can Bank on certain projects
being a success especially if they aren't simply going to increase the amount of
low risk media they produce and continue to put all of their eggs into only a
couple of very expensive baskets for instance Avatar the way of water didn't
break even until it hit 1.1 billion dollars at the box office even though
terrifier 2 only made 12.6 million that was 42 times its budget of 250 000. in
order for Avatar to have that same kind of profit margin it would need to make
10.5 billion dollars which means naturally Studio content is going to get more
formulaic because it needs to fit proven models for success and their media is
going to begin to be directed at the broadest possible audience but as a
crowd-financed web series hell of a boss is in a unique situation Medrano does
not strictly need to answer to anyone to approve the content that she wants to
fill her media with as a more or less independent Creator she can make media
independently strictly speaking hell of a boss is independent but the show from
which it spun off has been hotel is not technically independent anymore has been
was picked up by a studio for more episodes none other than a24 the studio I'd
sell my left lung right kidney and both nuts to work with a24 is a relatively
small Studio founded in 2012 though they themselves are a bit off the beaten
path the studio gained recent Renown for releasing everything everywhere all at
once a critical inbox office success however the Studio's other noteworthy
venues include Swiss army man ex machina hereditary the lighthouse and Euphoria
the Studio's history is interesting but essentially amounts to a rich person
throwing small fortunes at creative types to just mess around and find out it
just so happens that the creative people they throw money at are exceptionally
talented maybe an a24 executive just watched the pilot and decided they were
going to throw money at something that they wanted to see more of you know like
patreon Linked In the description God forbid a studio head that actually watches
and enjoys stuff industry's secret is that the people running these media
companies don't actually watch the movies or television shows that they produce
patreon and other crowdfunding services have made careers for small creators who
would have never otherwise managed to find a platform artists existed because of
patrons you know back in the day when an old money type with titles and tracks
of land would see some poet or composer and would pay them to live in their
Manner and make art the rich person then gets to say hey I helped this cool
artist friend who I am definitely not having any gay sex with by the way make
something really really cool not a perfect system especially because you can't
really criticize the wealthy classes directly but clever artists and this is one
thing that Shakespeare was very good at would sneak in some real social
commentary he was also apparently pretty good at the gay sex part too allegedly
so yeah I'm pretty comfortable qualifying hell of a boss as Independent Media
because on top of everything else vivzipop has a habit of collaborating with
other independent creators in significant ways and some of these creators are
people that most corporations in their right mind wouldn't touch with a laser
pointer and a hazmat suit [Music] who is Brandon Rogers Brandon Rogers is a
YouTuber who's been around since the site became a thing joining the platform in
2006 he's best known for satirical skits where he plays a multitude of
characters characters that are crass offensive arrogant repulsive aggressive
unsavory kind caring touching and wait what the hell is this you can't be
offensive and touching but apparently he is his channel originally started out
as simple comedy sketches with recurring characters however in recent years he's
developed a sort of Cinematic Universe for himself with multi-episode series
these include stuff and Sam blame the hero and normal British series as well as
crossover one-off episodes like a day at the park and a day at the beach with my
wrestling Crush Sammy Guevara even co-starring in Helen trains a wrestler
because of Brandon's dedication to the joke and ever increasing production value
he's lasted a lot longer on YouTube than most of the sketch comedians that
popped up on the platform in the early days a pretty damn impressive feat
considering a multitude of his videos are rated 18 plus by YouTube and he makes
absolutely no effort to self-censor which you'd think might be the end of him
these days but it seems to work in his favor normally the phrase equal
opportunity offender can be a bit of a trigger look at creators like Trey Parker
and Matt Stone of South Park and their pseudo-libertarian approach to whom they
make the target of their ridicule yes they target established Authority
depicting the nonchalant cruelty of Republicans the blase ineptitude of
Democrats showcasing the narrow balance of police brutality and the incompetence
of law enforcement the series does on occasion rush to the defense of public
figures who are perhaps unjustly the target of media mockery such as Britney
Spears and at times they use their platform to stand up for marginalized groups
like The episode with Stan's gay dog and all of this sounds like an upstanding
responsible use of a given platform if it wasn't for the Equal Opportunity part
because there is no specific Target of their mockery they target everyone there
is a component of their whiteness and straightness that doesn't seem to
understand how institutions of Oppression function and while you can deflect
criticism for targeting elements of a minority community's Culture by saying
we're making fun of everyone it doesn't take into account a culture which is
already passively ridiculing those same people for instance they're falling out
with Isaac Hayes the voice actor of staple character Chef is indicative of this
although things do get a bit complicated Chef was unknowingly racist caricature
that was used to often address the white perspective of black people in small
communities they were already threading the needle Isaac's sudden departure from
the series left him on very bad terms with Parker and stone only using existing
dialogue lines they wrote Chef out of the series with a gruesome death and in
the same episode which highlighted an unspoken historic precedent of English
adventurers and explorers molesting the indigenous children of colonized Nations
they implicated their only reoccurring black adult character a cafeteria Chef in
an elementary school as being a pedophile and this is in conjunction with a
recurring polarized take on trans people and identities ranging from pretty okay
to downright transphobic and also targeting and ridiculing specific people like
Al Gore and his climate change advocacy which has had detrimental and measurable
real-world effects remember kids it's never just a cartoon so when it comes to a
description of Brandon Rogers and his comedic style he can also fit as an equal
opportunity offender but why am I willing to criticize Parker and Stone where I
will praise Rogers Rogers also has a broad range of characters which he uses to
style his comedy he also uses potty and Gallows humor for his carnivalesque
videos Suburban moms single spinsters gay men lesbians homophobes white people
black people Asian people Hispanic people children the poor the English the
blind cats social media influencers ghosts Jeff Goldblum closet cases and even
robots they're all lampooned skewered and torn to shreds but then in odd moments
of tenderness many of them are brought down from their ridiculous Heights and
become surprisingly identifiable Bryce tank thrust a CEO turned president of the
United States turned disgraced ex-president of the United States is probably one
of the best characterizations of corporate evil I've ever seen with her
literally having no heart and raising an army of clones just to rip their hearts
out so that she can keep on being the biggest [ __ ] in America but even she has
had a backstory developed that humanizes her because in the world that Brandon
Rogers creates no one is above being made fun of and almost no one is too low to
sympathize with Rogers himself is gay and of Portuguese Filipino Scottish and
Spanish descent so he gets a pass for pretty much everyone that he makes fun of
in his videos but even though he's a gay man of color who successfully broken
into the insult comic World dominated by straight white men and also broken the
rules and made it better in my humble opinion not all gay people are all too
fond of his videos it's hard not to find gays on Twitter Reddit or Tumblr to
crying him is bad for the community and giving gays a bad name he's too crass
too juvenile not setting a good example not being a good gay as it were I don't
know what you do with these but I know you people will that's a vacuum yes but
what do they use it for in fact doesn't he seem to just represent all the things
that we try to avoid putting forth the absolute wrongest version of our
community to show to The Straits but on the other hand doesn't it just get
exhausting to put on all of these errors for the sake of impressing the
straights why do we have to be biting our tongue like it's Thanksgiving dinner
with relatives who think it's important to get a Republican president every now
and then just to balance out the Democrats and who is the we that is deciding
what we should and should not depict to the CIS hetero hegemony [Music] queer
people are put off by Brandon Rogers usually the same group of people who don't
like being locked into the lgbtq umbrella term there's a sensibility in the
community itself that feels that Roger's crass explicit YouTube videos are in
detriment to the community because golly gee what are the straights gonna think
of us if we aren't showing them that we can be just as straight as them or
straighter if at all possible putting on an act that will earn us acceptance
into the hetero hegemony should not be the sensibilities that we use as a
foundation we had to create this community and queer enclaves to protect
ourselves from this group of people in the first place and now we are going to
put ourselves under such massive duress just to avoid backlash from them if that
weren't the case we would ask a different question one that does not require an
answer why shouldn't Brandon Rogers make his videos make 2023 the first year
where we stopped saying that one Rogue queer with no straight social filter is
somehow sabotaging everyone else's rights all that does is point out how fickle
the hegemony's morality is and that we ought to hold them to a higher standard
not us meanwhile have we really sat down and asked ourselves if playing to
straight standards is a fantastic idea and when I say straight I do mean
cisgender and heterosexual I do acknowledge that a lot of trans people are
heterosexual but like a bisexual person telling everyone they're gay just to
save time I have places that I'm trying to go with this see the problem with an
appeal to The Straits is that they don't really know how we want to be seen
which results in a lot of CIS people believing that Blair white is a shining
example of trans visibility the problem here is that it is easy to receive
praise and recognition among the hegemonistic cultures by telling them that
there is no onus on them to change or adapt playing to the crowd as it were
whereas to make any strides in visibility you have to be willing to challenge
convention the message we need to send to truly gain strides in the fight for
our rights is that people do not need to live by this rockwellian set of nuclear
family values to be fine I certainly hope that as Rogers becomes more prolific
and prominent that he does not face more backlash for developing the kind of
content he wants to produce on one hand he yes does make content that seems
highly indicative of lowbrow YouTube skit comedy which can often amount to men
in bad drags screaming for no reason however Rogers is capable of demonstrating
a great deal of Technical and narrative skill in the development of these videos
as far as there is a lot of shrieking in these skits his dialogue has a punch
characters are well developed and he makes good use of visual cues and
regardless of how chaotic they seem they all drive toward a straightforward
theme for instance he's one of the only creators I can think of who's pulled off
time travel well but most importantly all of his characters no matter how
outrageous are indicative of a kind of humanity at their core they are
identifiable on a personal level in a way where you can say I know that person
even if the person you're thinking of does not go quite so hard where did you
get vodka one more time in Mama's mouth ultimately this is the clear separation
between the likes of Parker and stone and Rogers both can be offensive satire
however South Park can have a tendency to be personally insulting rather than
Rogers whose insults are not quite so personal if I were to qualify it I would
say that the difference would be Roger's comedy targets Trends or behaviors
themselves and even if they are indicative of a particular identity the identity
is not the target merely their behavior he humanizes his characters while he's
making fun of them while targeting expressions of an identity care is taken not
to invalidate the identity it is the character that is comedic whereas South
Park functions well when it's making fun of white straight people because in the
show there are still redeemable White characters to be found with a limited cast
of diverse characters and a set of narrative framing devices that paint these
communities with broad Strokes the identity itself becomes the target there's no
rationale or cultural context for why these people act the way they do simply
holding up the behavior and saying isn't this weird see how peculiar this is
look at this gay guy wearing a harness ah those homosexuals it's not a secret
that people of privilege have difficulty separating a criticism of behavior from
a criticism of identity keep in mind Born This Way was a message that was not
projected to them until February of 2011. those are privilege are so accustomed
to joining in ridicule of other people that the second someone makes fun of a
component of white people there is a widespread right-wing backlash about how
some how whiteness and Santa Claus are under attack I don't like them putting
chemicals in the water that turn the freaking frogs gay is the inability to
navigate these nuances a component of privilege or is it something conditioned
by living in privilege meanwhile successful satire tends to hold a reverence for
the target of ridicule Tina Fey's method of doing this for instance is to make
fun of the person doing the ridiculing just as much as the target of Comedy or
to ridicule the act of ridicule itself but at the core all subjects of mockery
need to be put in the context of their own Humanity I feel this is indicative of
why exactly hell of a boss holds so much impact as a writer on most episodes
Rogers seems to be aware of how these characters can reach such carnivalesque
Heights while at the same time keeping them identifiable this sets the stage for
when he steps away from the writer's chair for episodes that are intended to be
more personal and empathetic medrano's brand without them being tonally jarring
suffice to say hell of a boss's ability to play both camps exceptionally well
makes it stand out in a way that is refreshing to see especially in an era where
there is more and more social pressure to go through corporate channels to
generate media because on the other side of an unspoken shame directed at those
who have the Moxie gumption coordination Drive determination grit skill talent
and persist to produce their own media independent of a corporate structure and
agenda there's a very loudly spoken praise for those of us especially for
minority communities who managed to convince a CEO to let us make our media
[Music] when it comes to the success of Ipsy Pop animation and especially the
prominence of Medrano and Rogers as YouTube creators there's a discussion to be
had about why queer content doesn't seem to translate onto the big screen as
well as being touch and go with cable TV whereas our visibility seems to thrive
on streaming and on media sharing platforms like YouTube it seems like the
smaller the screen the more liable we are to thrive there's an under discussed
discourse for why this may be the easiest suggestion and this is Hollywood's
favorite is that gay stories just don't make money sure we are a relatively
small community but so are so many other communities who receive a wide range of
representation in film and what it comes down to is that no we don't really turn
out to support movies that purport to represent us but I think the answer for
why is more complicated than we've been led to believe there were three prime
examples in 2022 two of which failed primarily due to neglect Studios under
promoting these films to a point where reporting on strange worlds opening
weekend box office bomb was the first time a lot of people had even heard of the
movie meanwhile it went to number one on Disney plus Fire Island was sent to
Hulu to die both of these are Disney's Fault by the way shocker and yes gay
people are going to get blamed for this for whatever reason but I would instead
like to confront my own community with why we quote unquote let Billy eichner's
Bros flop for its theatrical release boiler alert I actually literally could not
bring myself to finish watching Bros it was that bad I had to read a synopsis of
the last 20 minutes which did not help a breakdown of bros really isn't
necessary if you know who Eichner is imagine that but in a plot that tries to
frame him as endearing somehow imagine a regular rom-com but gay and lacking
narrative cohesion and without tonal consistency and an unnecessary amount of
f-bombs and no less than four sex scenes involving him and Incredibly attractive
white guys this combined earned the film and hard R rating which it seems quite
proud of in spite of the fact that that limits the potential theatrical audience
Eichner is desperately trying to be both Tina Fey and Larry Kramer however he's
too arrogant to direct criticism at himself yet too insecure to say anything
actually provocative but regardless of the fact that R-rated films have been
shown to perform quite well at the box office especially if made for a moderate
budget Bros underperformed to a point of Eichner explicitly citing homophobia as
the sole reason for why the film failed Okay so why didn't your own people go
see it then Billy make no mistake the queer demographic is relatively small for
now however we in conjunction with a broader audience who are interested in
queer characters and stories were invested enough to give hell of a boss the
kind of views on YouTube which would have any television executive wetting their
pants given that both hell of a boss and Bros have a similar comfort with curse
words and sexuality why is one so much more successful than the other regardless
of the platform a hell of a boss is just ubiquitously more successful and it was
made without the stamp of approval from a major studio and most importantly why
do queer audiences gravitate towards the YouTube show so strongly whereas queer
audiences were likely to turn away from Bros a common argument is that queer
people aren't comfortable going to see queer movies in theaters the outdoor
Journey to the cinema May attract the prying eyes of homophobes that it's safer
and emotionally easier to just watch things on TV even as Bros receive glowing
reviews from critics why were queer audiences so turned off by it my explanation
is that this was a movie at its narrative core about gay love and Eichner giving
his character the opportunity to sleep with several ridiculously attractive men
while the film claims to to decry these values which is made abundantly Apparent
at the beginning of the film Eichner builds a normative concept of gay love
which is outstandingly similar to straight love gay people may not appreciate
this message because gay love itself is not a monolith at least not the monolith
that straight love can be thing is without the rudder of social etiquette
milestones we develop our own ways and our relationship structures can be quite
varied throwing gender dependent coupling to the wind there's a lack of clarity
regarding what roles two people may occupy in a romance trying to develop the
quintessential gay love story is impossible because every gay person approaches
love in a way that is defined by their distance from heterosexual coupling and
in this Bros tries to present itself as this quintessential story in developing
this new heterotangential gay hegemony I could foresee these opinions about Bros
or any other media that seeks to make a normative argument about this ours is in
straight love let me tell you what our love is I can see many people simply
feeling that one white homosexual CIS man living in New York City does not have
the right to Define that bro's narrative through line instead is that growing up
in one's approach to relationships means monogamy as that is the success factor
of the story it moralizes monogamous love normatively aggrandizing itself or
criticizing media that promotes heterotypical love while making a mockery out of
anything that is even slightly out of the CIS heteronorm Rose ends up being a
broad Strokes normative description about the moralistic direction in which gay
men apparently ought to direct their lives again people who were pushed from the
hegemony who in turn had to create their own identities do not like being told
what their identity should be like Billy eichner's character in Bros Bobby the
movie spends far too much time insulting the people who it then demands support
from and Eichner does expect to be celebrated in spite of the fact that he
spends the entire movie being critical of everybody people let alone gay people
generally don't like that eichner's attitude during the movie's promotion didn't
seem to help he went around making statements indicating that this was the first
gay movie that mattered he didn't say it was the first gay movie but he did
claim that it was the first gay romantic comedy to be produced by a large studio
which is also wrong but the statement did seem to imply that prior gay movies
the ones that kept us going through his Century of persecution seemed to matter
less than this one eichner's very public self-congratulatory statements well
off-putting to queer people did a lot to intrinsically tie this movie to
queerness in a way that was not done with say Strange World between the two
critics seemed to be much more comfortable celebrating Bros and after watching
the quality of Bros okay I have some filmmaker stuff I need to get off my chest
Rose was shot with a kind of lens called an anamorphic lens these lenses are
very expensive and difficult to work with they make the shot wider by shrinking
the image like what happens when you squeeze a JPEG in Photoshop and then the
editor has to properly de-squeeze the image in post-production anamorphic lenses
are used to generate incredibly dramatic impactful visuals that are often what
people would consider cinematic I have no idea why Bros needed to be shot with
these lenses and they messed it up while I was watching it I noticed that the
image wasn't de-squeezed properly it's nothing that literally like anyone would
notice except people who know what to look for but seriously this is not a movie
that requires fancy camera lenses used to shoot movies like Lawrence of Arabia
and the Lord of the Rings anyway taking stock of the technical skills and talent
that went into Bros the only reason I think that it was received as positively
as it was is because critics were afraid of being accused of being homophobic
for giving it an honest review and while I can't know for certain Eichner
certainly made a point of accusing everyone in the world minus the 15 people who
actually saw the damn thing of being homophobic I can foresee a few critics
maybe being afraid that if they gave it the good old thumbs down Eichner would
have personally showed up at their doorstep with a baseball bat and four out of
the Five Guys from queer eye what does confuse me about Bros and this is going
to seem generalized is the movie itself Bros as a project confuses me from a
creative side the film is designed to Lampoon a very real precedent of queer
media kowtowing to a heteronormative standard while at the same time Being
Framed through a heteronormative love story format all the while the film itself
pushes for queer Independence while the creative team was very proud of
themselves for using one of the largest film studios in the world to validate it
if queer creators are in need of creative Liberation from hetero establishment
expectations and formats why was it so damn important to get made by one of the
largest heteroestablishments in Hollywood [Music] for all bros seem to Pride
itself on being the gay movie it certainly doesn't reach very far to accommodate
the people it claims to want to service and definitely expects that audiences do
the heavy lifting in this relationship with the media and yet aside from living
in this fictitious self-insertion wish fulfillment world of fiction where
everybody likes Billy I mean Bobby and takes him seriously every stop is pulled
to validate straight opinions of queer identities don't worry Straits you know
all those weird things about gay culture like polyamory and being comfortably
single into your 40s and you know how queer people are just constantly arguing
about privilege yeah don't worry it is dumb and dysfunctional I said so if
Eichner really was intent on making Bros for us queer people then he wouldn't
have blamed straight people for why it flopped and in the end Bros fits the
definition of exactly what it claimed it was different from a gay movie made for
the bemusement and celebration of straight people but if Eichner was sincere in
wanting to create media that speaks two and four the queer community then that
dream was always going to be hobbled by a big Hollywood producer for whom this
community is a demographic on a chart and a small one compared to the straight
white men and women aged 18 to 56. more confusing still is the fact that this
group of Executives and creative decision makers who think they know something
about what audiences want in spite of Landing their job after coming from the
microwave division that insists that flops like Bros are proof positive that
there's just no demand for queer content meanwhile roll over to vivzipop's
YouTube channel and find views that any television producer would
ritualistically sacrifice their first and second born to translate into ratings
no demand no demand none apparently and hell of a boss sashayed right past the
limits of bold language and sexuality that Bros stopped at all the while this
show does incorporate queer aesthetic sensibilities and does feel comfortable
digging into the issues affected by queerness and do all the things that Bros
cannot or will not do because its narrative structure is predicated on the
limits of what a corporate body will let it do though her platform is self-made
and much smaller Medrano has reached more audiences than an overwhelming
majority of creators who make as would be considered by many the right kind of
queer content so why is Corporate made media put on such a high pedestal why do
we have to organize our community to watch Oscar bait [ __ ] and generic
rom-coms but with gay characters under the promise that if we show everyone that
this can be a success then maybe they will actually give us something we want
never mind that wild cats like Medrano and Rogers have been there the whole time
building content that already speaks to us on their own Medrano is demonstrating
that their is social currency for Niche content to thrive in spite of every
media executive except at a24 apparently saying it could never sell is it for
everyone no should it be for everyone no the problem with corporate media is
that it needs to be for everyone meanwhile this is the space for Prestige where
everyone wants to be where we're told this is where you need to go to know that
you've made it this is the coveted spot this is where you want to move your
career this is the big leagues could it really be just about getting a bigger
paycheck or is there some kind of subliminal thought process that by being
contracted by a straight executive it means we're overcoming persecution or
maybe individual creators feel more validated by a single executive than by the
praise of a large fan base but what about the single executive's opinion is more
important than a whole audience feeling seen by your art why is there still such
a rat race to impress Executives when people like Medrano and other independent
creators are proving that you can make a living by producing the kind of media
that you want to make in the first place making good art isn't at odds with
making a living why is external approval so important there was one one cohesive
message that came out of Disney Pixar's Cars that there is integrity and value
in the slow lane that by chasing the more lucrative contract the prestigious
brand you end up missing so much and leaving behind the people who may mean a
lot to you an entire movie designed to sell Lightning McQueen merchandise to
have colorful settings and flashing lights and it has this one Salient thing to
say how did so many people miss it it came out 15 years ago why don't more
people of my generation celebrate people who don't sell out [Music] having lived
as a gay man for 30 some odd years now I've seen the community go through some
big changes when I was a kid in the 90s I remember seeing arguments and debates
over don't ask don't tell in the Defense of Marriage Act in the United States I
remember Ellen DeGeneres coming out and all the chaos that surrounded that I can
still see my mom crying while watching the news coverage about the murder of
Matthew Shepard my family talking about the legal battle here in Canada about
whether or not a boy could bring another boy to his prom I watched Queer as Folk
and Will and Grace opened the eyes of millions of viewers each week I seethed as
George W bush tried using the gay community and our marriage rights as an
election issue in 2004 and then he won I was shocked the night Barack Obama was
elected president of the United States only for California of all states to
enshrine discrimination into their constitution with the passage of prop 8. I
watched and wrapped as soldier after Soldier came forward to talk about how they
had been booted out of the U.S military because they were gay even though
they're commanding officers knew full well that they were gay when they sent
them on multiple tours in Iraq and Afghanistan and then a dishonorable discharge
meant that even after multiple tours they lost all their benefits and I
eventually cheered when Prop 8 was overturned by the Supreme Court same-sex
marriage was legalized and the don't ask don't tell policy was repealed all of
this was between 1993 and 2015. that's 22 years the fight for gay rights had
been going on long before 1993 of course it's been going on forever really but
it feels like in the 22 years between 93 and 2015 that gay rights really went
mainstream since 93 we've watched as politicians like Joe Biden voted against
our rights by voting for the Defense of Marriage Act and we watched as he as the
President of the United States fully repealed the statute in 2022 when he signed
the respect for Marriage Act it's not politics if it's character development
that was sarcasm by the way pay attention to voting records not just what people
say we saw gay characters only being allowed on TV after a certain time of night
and movies almost universally being rated R if they had a gay character to
Disney releasing a 200 million dollar animated movie with a gay lead character
even if they did neglect to Market it we saw lgbtq literature go from existing
on the fringes with people rushing out of tiny bookstores with non-descript
paper bags containing copies of books by authors like Christopher isherwood
Radcliffe Hall and James Baldwin to queer Y.A books becoming Global bestsellers
and inspiring hit TV shows though we've certainly run into some setbacks the
progress has seemed rapid and unprecedented at least that's what the straights
say they don't seem to realize that people were fighting for gay rights before
the Clinton Administration but if you look at the queer community of today and
the queer community of the pre-aids era it feels like there's something missing
not just the tens of thousands of Brilliant Minds talented artists and loving
people who we've lost to that disease but a sense of something else the
shamelessness the be whoever you want to be attitude that perpetuated within the
community before fighting for our very lives and hospital beds became the only
fight we could fight it's telling I think that once protease Inhibitors had
reached the market and an HIV diagnosis was no longer a death sentence the
battles that rose out of the AIDS epidemic for gay people where access to
marriage and military service when Once the queer Community was focused on
creating the best art and living lives worth telling stories about the 1990s
brought on a new goal how best to fit in as the brilliant friend Leibowitz has
said many times the first people who died of AIDS were the interesting ones the
artists there's a reason that Art became Ghostbusters and cats in the 1980s
because all of the really talented artists were dying the rule Breakers ones who
weren't afraid to shake things up and the audience died with them now we don't
have any kind of discerning audience when that audience died and that audience
died in five minutes literally people didn't die faster in a war and it allowed
of course like the second third fourth tier to rise up to the front because of
course the first people who died of AIDS were the people who I don't know how to
put this got laid a lot okay now imagine who didn't get AIDS that's who was then
lauded as like the great artists so many of the gays Left Alive once the Clinton
Administration came into being were to be frank the boring ones the gays who
knew nobody and who nobody knew and they Rose to the top of the community and
therefore their priorities Rose to the top of the community as well and what did
they want apparently they wanted to join the Army and have big gay weddings
General employment non-discrimination wasn't all that important to them making
sexuality and gender identity a protected class along with sex race and religion
wasn't that important to them they wanted marriage and Military because they
were the good gays not the naughty gays who were sleeping around and dying of
AIDS not the poor gays who couldn't make political contributions they were the
gays with families and commitment ceremonies and office jobs and houses they
were the good ones the ones who would look fantastic and Incredibly marketable
when they were interviewed by CNN they were the gays whose straight people would
look at and say to themselves maybe they're not so bad after all I still don't
want my kid to be gay but maybe it's okay if Bob and Henry got married the gay
rights movement shifted from accept us for who we are to will be whatever you
want us to be if you accept us and it's kind of remained that way over the last
30 years we've been trained to be offended by queers who step too far out of the
mainstream plenty and I mean plenty of gays online were on edge when Billy
Porter started showing up to Awards throws and dresses lots and I mean Lots of
gays were unnerved and worried when trans people started coming out of their own
closets some going so far as to disavow the T from the LGBT because they were
worried people who don't like trans people would Lop in the gay men and women in
with them who needs Community when you've already got your house in the suburbs
right and so so so so many gays will rise up in a social media tornado at the
first sight of a problematic queer showing up somewhere in Media and I'm not
even talking about like serial killers like Dahmer or Buffalo Bill I mean I just
mean the [ __ ] gays being anywhere near a sex positive as Samantha was on Sex
in the City 20 years ago could lead to a gay character in today's day and age
being canceled for not being a good role model for the community the queer
Community is one that's made up of oddly shaped characters all being forced to
fit into these perfectly square boxes built by the men who wanted marriage and
Military over protected rights for everyone so it's been absolutely revelatory
for me born right around the time the good gays started taking control to see
some bad gaze being naughty in media and having a blast doing it Brandon Rogers
has been the antithesis of the good gays in those old gay marriage commercials
for about 15 years now and his videos are just getting better and more complex
as time goes on giving us queer characters that mainstream media would be far
far too squeamish to portray fizzy Pop's expanding world of hell has given us
queer assassins queer princes of Hell queer demonic drug addicts and the queer
daughter of Lucifer Lilith themselves who just wants to help people meanwhile
Hollywood gives us annoying gaze dying gaze and gaze they refuse to Market James
is this another video where you say we should support independent creators in
studios instead of supporting the giant Hollywood conglomerates yes asking
Hollywood to give us fun Earnest and meaningful representation only for them to
puke out Bros and then still beg these producers it's like begging a [ __ ]
ex-boyfriend to take you back because you feel lonely even if he does say yes
you think it's not gonna suck it is meanwhile there's a horde of people begging
for your attention that we as a whole Community have managed to ignore
altogether some YouTubers are making Funnier videos than anything Hollywood's
been spitting out lately some production companies are making queer inclusive
content so good it's the front runner for every Best Picture award this season
even though it came out last March so in 2023 I think we need to make a promise
to search out and watch some more independent queer media and stop jumping for
joy every time Marvel happens to cast a queer actor I'd say we're a long way off
from Disney producing anything nearly as Queer as the 2013 Young Avengers run by
Kieran Gillen holding your breath for this is only going to turn you blue
support queer creators on patreon by independently published books by queer
authors stream web series by queer video producers and watch all the queer
movies and series that somehow make their way onto major streaming services like
Netflix and Amazon support it all yes even if you find it offensive because if
you think queer characters should be beacons of great decision making and career
choices if you think queer characters need to be models to show off to the
Straits The Straits who hate us in 2023 are still gonna hate us if we come
across as perfect or flawed so let's stop caring what they think of us and live
our lives the way we want to without asking for their acceptance or their
permission it's time we start hearing the message that corporations and other
media Gatekeepers refuse to say that you are enough that you have intrinsic
value without Authority's validation that there are people who want your stories
your art and your feelings maybe they'll be a little rough around the edges but
maybe that's better because of the real raw unadulterated place it comes from
the most Hollywood producers or Executives could never understand but for which
there may be an audience who will feel seen by these stories and we'll see you
in return it's time for us to start considering whose opinions about us actually
matter and to start seeing ourselves as we are as Worthy because you're worth so
much more than a column on a spreadsheet [Music] foreign [Music] [Applause]
[Music] [Music] thank you [Music] foreign [Music]