this video is brought to you by Squarespace as diversity becomes more and more
of a sticking point in our social landscape discourse around representation
follows close behind there is a precedent for developing an incorrect narrative
around romanticized historical events presenting sentiments that simply don't
represent a community as a whole and struggling to actively showcase visible
representation or understand what qualifies as visible representation and of
course when you do get representation right you actually have to go to the right
lengths to promote it just like you would any other property but that said it's
not like good representation doesn't exist usually when the people who are being
represented get to make their own stuff it tends to be well-received sometimes
not whether I agree with the response or not but usually if you exist within the
queer Community you generally have a better understanding of how to Showcase
these people what matters to them what their values are and what you can even
make fun of without insulting everyone and believe me the queer Community has a
heap of that for instance transmen and enbs for some reason really like rats
like pet rats a lot of them feel this way and nobody knows why though for people
who are not queer themselves but who do want to create queer characters there
are a range of challenges that they face such as limited perspective straight
riters by virtue of their own sexual Orient ation likely don't have firsthand
experience with the unique challenges emotions and nuances that queer
individuals face and cultural sensitivity and accuracy straight writers might
lack this cultural sensitivity leading to misrepresentations or inaccurate
depictions that fail to capture the essence of queer lives the potential for
unintentional insensitivity can arise from a lack of research or an overreliance
on current mainstream media representations there's also the fear of offending
this fear may lead them to tiptoe around important issues or sanitize the
experience of queer characters resulting in narratives that lack depth and
emotional resonance and there's stereotyping and tokenism when queer characters
are reduced to being nothing but their sexual orientation or gender identity
becoming defined solely by this one part of themselves rather than their
personalities aspirations and complexities and this is perhaps true of all
categories of diverse characters however there is a recent Buzz around queerness
both from consumers and producers and through this Buzz we've seen the Good the
Bad and the Ugly and while queer creators are finally getting a chance to tell
their own stories straight creators can struggle to deliver these same messages
so that being said why is Neil gaming so good at it this video is brought to you
by Squarespace Squarespace is an all-in-one web design and hosting platform that
makes it easy for you to create a website and Market your brand with
industry-leading website templates that are easy to customize you don't need any
design experience to show the world your best digital self Squarespace also
makes it easy to keep in touch with your audience or customers with their
expertly designed email templates that are just as easy to customize as their
websites you can follow up with customers or just keep your audience in the loop
with your latest updates that's why we're launching a newsletter with certain
social media sites going the way of the dodo we wanted a way to keep in touch
with our amazing subscribers and Squarespace gives us the perfect way to do that
in fact you can sign up for our newsletter right now which will include links to
new videos progress updates for T's pictures as well as reviews articles and so
much more you can sign up for free at our Squarespace website jameson.com you
can head to squarespace.com right now for a free trial and when you're ready to
launch your site go to squarespace.com jameses that's j m s to save 10% off of
your first purchase of a website or domain start showing the world how amazing
you are today with Squarespace Neil Gaiman typifies a sort of literary polymorph
where in spite of his cultural impact he has written or contributed to a total
of only 11 novels however factoring in his work in screenplays tele plays Comics
children's books and non-fiction Gaiman has a considerable library of work
including the creation of a certain dark-haired magical boy with an owl familiar
which was suspiciously published through DC Comics 7 years prior to Harry Potter
hitting the shelves must be magic granted I say only 11 novels as if even that
isn't impressive whereas once it was not considered out of the ordinary to be
invited into literary cannon with far less than 11 published works that's
usually not possible today unless of course one comes from money or is the one
new author of a decade that the publishing industry has decided to Rally behind
but especially as far as high-profile writers go Gaiman has peppered his library
of works with a broad range of diverse characters representing a myriad of Life
Experiences similar to the forced wokeness accusations that were hurled at the
rings of power which focused more on gender and race than the broad changes to
the characters and mythology the Netflix adaptation of gamon's iconic Sandman
series was given the same criticism from the predictable kinds of people the
displeasure at seeing queer experiences on the screen clearly indicated that
these particular critics hadn't read The Source material maybe they just looked
at the pictures G Renown as a writer truly began in 1990 when he co-authored
good Omens with literary giant Terry pratchet according to Legend Neil pitched
the idea to pratchet offand at a convention to which pratchet seemed agreeable
though Neil assumed that he was just being let down gently and put it out of his
mind sometime later Neil got a phone call from pratchet who wanted to know how
this misplaced Antichrist idea might play out in so far as the author's
developed this Cosmos neither angels nor demons have sex organs nor do they
actively seek out sexual intercourse and and by all accounts gender is more or
less described based on how an observer might categorize them regardless even of
that this he they angel demon Duo are so incredibly married it was basically a
joke even at the time of good oman's publication while many fans of the show and
even of the book were quick to describe a Zera which is a fictional name
approved by spell Che believe it or not and Crowley as a gay couple it was
indeed exasperated by gaiman's description of the tale as a love story and yet
both God the narrator of the story and Gaiman are hesit to use the term gay to
describe them but unlike your average Network Executive Press Conference or
corporate social media account this explanation is queerer than the typical just
friends copout the narrator describes that most people who encounter aerail May
describe him as quote gayer than a tree full of monkeys on nitrous oxide but
does not describe a zerel as gay himself gaimon elaborated that the love story
between a zerel and Crowley is not gay because neither of them are men one is an
Angel and the other a demon neither of whom whom are beings that have sex traits
and any ambiguity in the first story is dismissed in the second you're a good
lad not actually either this suggests that any element of gender expression is
the result of self-identification or a matter of how Others May observe them
furthermore the celestial beings seem to refer to each other by they them from
an authorial standpoint this is a complex understanding of gender and sexuality
that is even a little bit theoretical for many within the community itself if
there is no element of sex or G gender present in a romantic pairing how can we
describe the sexual orientation of the couple the unfortunate thing about the
term homosexual is that it describes not only the gender of the subject's
attraction but the gender of the subject as well homosexual same gender
attraction you need to have a gender to be attracted to the same gender as the
public begins to understand and accept a separation of sex and gender many of
these sexual labels fail to describe what they are meant to an amab trans
non-binary person who is attracted to high feminine gender traits among gay men
we don't have language to describe that yet factor in that both zerel and
Crowley have a very ambiguous set of gendered mannerisms and expressions Gaiman
has stated that they don't really know what gender is about but they do their
best to emulate it to their own understanding humans are weird and that's how it
works I knew that ironically this may actually be an instance where homosexual
actually would apply but even that depends entirely on if homosexual is
compatible with asexual homoromantic but again in terms of gender non-conformity
the gender of one person is not relevant to describe the attraction to another
out of all the psychological terminology that came out of the 1800s that has
become archaic why are we still holding on to these terms as if our personhood
depends on them don't answer that I I I know why I've tried to make that video
like seven times now you know how God likes sevens however instead of engaging
in a debate about how we identify Cosmic beings trying their best to humanely
live their their best eternities Gaiman simply avoids the discussion altogether
not that he excludes queerness from a reading of these characters they're
certainly not straight but their place in queerness is not worth categorizing
Beyond queer not even LGBT because they fit none of those categories the first
season of good Omens was a show that had a couple our angel and demon of some
Renown at the center of it though no confirmation came in season one anyone with
a brain could see it and season 2 became a queer show and in order to deter an
investigation from Heaven Crowley and airell need to Stage a love story Maggie
is a lonely record saleswoman who has a strong crush on nah the overworked owner
of a cafe nah however is already in a relationship we never meet her partner but
through text messages we have a clear indication that not everything's coming up
Rose is there Nina's girlfriend is so intensely jealous it likely crosses into
emotional abuse we aren't put on any kind of pedestal here we have the same kind
of relationship problems that straight people have however as much as Maggie is
Lovesick and nah is stressed out over a relationship that turns into a messy
breakup neither of them are defined by their attraction to the other their
personhood is primary over their queerness and neither are justified by romantic
attractions Nina smartly decides that immediately after a breakup is not a good
time to get emotionally invested with another woman which is sound psychological
advice coming out of Fantastical queer fiction good on you this is secondary
only to the romance between aerail and Crowley which is split up in the end
because the Damned Angel suddenly gets a heart on for a promotion you idiot we
could have been us gaimon has smaller roles for queerness as well a sketchy
Scotsman openly professes that he uses his phone only for grinder and the owner
of a magic shop references an anniversary with his partner who he brings to aerl
Street Business Association meeting partner being an apt genderless descriptor
because his partner is visibly androgynous in fact throughout the season
characters typically stick to non-gender descriptions of relations and
individuals something that I imagine most people wouldn't even notice unless
they have it pointed out to them and considering that neither angels nor demons
have gender in the first place the romance between be's abub and Gabriel would
be queer in spite of their actor's genders as far as what I've read of gaimon's
works this seems to be by far his queerest and well I'm not complaining this
level of brazen in-your-face queerness is a a little bit out of character for
him though he does his best to quietly present visible queer identities without
making a big fuss about throwing in surprised lesbians he likes troubled
lesbians and people without genders one of the greatest strengths of Gan as a
writer is his signature quiet Nuance in Pros even when he's conveying important
messaging or perhaps in regard to queer representation he may not have realized
just how important that was beginning in Sandman there is of course desire in
the fictional world of Sandman in conjunction with the actual deities of our
human history there exist seven beings who represent Universal aspects of The
Human Experience they are shape shifters whose physical appearance changes
depending upon who is observing them certainly makes it easy for artists and
casting directors functioning as a family of siblings rather than a proper
Pantheon they are called the endless and endless though they may be there is an
order to their births Destiny the eldest predates the existence of all life and
functions as a constant for all things in the universe and Cosmic Realms people
beings deities and celestial bodies whereas the other endless except for perhaps
death have limitations on their Authority death is the second visually inspired
by cinnamon Hadley death existed the moment the first living thing was born and
will vanish when the last living thing closes its eyes makes sense as death
represents the cosmic determinism of all living things in spite of her simple
Gothic appearance her manner is more akin to a death Dua or paliative care nurse
and while she is a universal her only rule is that all things end but can be
flippant about when that happens dream the central figure of the Sandman series
though not always the protagonist was born next he represents higher thought
processes that living things experience mostly imagination dream's domain seems
to be where reality and Imagination intersect what from The Real World is
brought into his realm and how things from his realm can become reality and how
everyone is  if he isn't running a tight ship gods and other deities are
suggested to have derived from dreams realm or not it's fairly vague probably
deliberately the next is referred to to as the prodigal who has been wandering
for some time and almost nobody knows where he is younger still are the twins
desire being the secondary antagonist of the Netflix series The behind
the-scenes string puller of all things disturbing desire was and has remained
non-binary though back in the day desire was referred to as it rather than they
them in the Netflix series in a mythological and literary history of depicting
the personification of lust and sex as a contemporarily beautiful woman this
speaks to a masculine Centric Society where the only individuals for whom desire
matters is men to make desire either or any gender would exclude the people for
whom that particular expression of physical beauty is not the object of desire
there's also an argument to be made that might suggest that desire's pronouns
are better as it because desire and fetishization are dehumanizing but desire
the character is also the personification of even nonsexual desire if you want
something or anything no matter how badly this is desire's realm desire's twin
is despair kind of a younger twin it's complicated despair is the
personification of exactly what she seems to be the gateway to her realm is
mirrors and her sigil is a hook very fitting visual indicators the youngest of
the Endless is delirium who was born Delight again it's complicated and everyone
in the family respects both desire's pronouns and deliriums name change it's
difficult to say how faithful Sandman will remain to its source material we only
have one season adapted from two story arcs and a large number of the comics are
one-off stories about humans who encounter the endless though the streaming
series was exceptionally true to the comics published three decades prior and
I'm sorry to you Neil if you're watching this for my overuse of words and
phrases like years decades illustrious career long ago inspiration for new
generations plural I don't really like thinking about how long ago Jurassic Park
was released and how I saw it in theaters but it's important to recognize the
historical context for how these queer ideas were being not only teased but
explored in intense taken for granted ways at a time before the majority of the
viewer base of this video had even been born sorry again Neil whereas today we
have an almost direct adaptation of Sandman via streaming and it is deced as
pandering to wokeness whereas it's basically just the same as it was in the
comics with just a bit more gay though that said I have a feeling that Gman was
treating the Netflix adaptation as an opportunity to give Sandman a go over and
bring even more of his initial Vision to life there is an expressed comfort with
casting black actors for roles that had been white in the comics and with
showcasing a deeper expression of the queer experience sorry bro these teeny
tiny sunglasses stay on during sex then that's okay I'm okay with that honestly
not so Ambiguously Camp men wearing blackout sunglasses to conceal weird eyes
seems to be a fixation for gaming and ocular F similes in general it seems as if
all of the base content from the first two arcs of Sandman made it into the
first season changes made to this content were primarily a matter of
streamlining the existing information pacing was smoothed out or characters were
altered or combined to fit into roles that serve the plot better John
Constantine was altered into Joanna Constantine riffing on the fual 18th century
character in later Sandman stories Hector and Lia were repurposed so that Lia
could occupy a larger role and to allow for more connecting tissue between
characters Rose's mother was the only character cut from the plot with laa now
occupying much of that role instead laa absolutely needed to be here because
that dream baby is important the nightmares brute and glob were replaced by
another nightmare are entirely G this is the most significant change as it
portends directly towards character development for dream that was not present
in the comics at all or at least development that takes much longer in the
comics it's worth noting however that there is simply much more Sandman content
in the Netflix series than the corresponding Comics the existing narrative was
beefed up to flush out a whole season unlike the Final Fantasy 7 remake however
the padding here doesn't seem as apparent in fact if you're reading the comics
after watching the series you may find that some of the most outst ending
moments are missing allog together the padding in the series outside of the
adjustments I mentioned earlier mesh so well into the Netflix adaptation because
they seem to be flushing out side plots that simply were never explored in the
comics though strongly indicated and it may shock you to know that these
expanded indicated plots were about queer [Music] people yes desire slays and
the Corinthian was always gay leaning but offhand inferences and inuendos and
the comics received a strong followup in the series not to say that they weren't
there but Rose's foyer to a drag Club was only really suggested in the comics
whereas Netflix gave it an entire musical number in drag I mean if you're going
to cast John Cameron Mitchell why not and not all the praise goes to gam Alan
heinberg was brought on as a co-writer for the series you can learn more about
him in the power couples video from February of forever ago heinberg himself is
an openly gay writer with a Strong pedigree in both comics and screenwriting
giman has always expressed an open to queer depictions but the Netflix series
likely with the help of heinberg expanded them a little or a lot Additionally
the gender swap of Joanna Constantine which was likely done to sever this from
any variant of DC adapted interconnected universes smart move to avoid them at
all costs at this point also made her a lesbian a very messy lesbian my favorite
kind of lesbian granted nothing about the story was changed except the magical
person's gender yes there are some human elements that are true to both straight
and queer relationships and that truth is people are the diner sequence was also
expanded in general but primarily featuring additional queer people very messy
queer people though certainly even if we're depicted making mistakes we ought to
recognize that these are the kinds of mistakes that straight people also make
rose has a gay friend who Sexes the concept of inhuman masquerade and
consumption of identity in the comics the Corinthian like to stick to murdering
gay men and while there were a lot of gays to unbury making the Corinthian more
indiscriminate about his victims and adding another gay side character who just
gets to be a person was a comfortable correction though as for the Corinthian in
general we have a Serial killing monster who appears as a gay man oughtn't that
have costed a stir in the queer Community I mean for all the real life serial
killers and mass Shooters who are straight white men our cultural Consciousness
certainly likes to hold on to the gay ones and the women this seems Rife for the
kind of content that would trigger our delicate snowflake sensibilities
especially in a cultural Echo chamber for which the choir sings you just can't
say anything anymore with increasingly vivacious intensity pitching a plot where
the primary antagonist is a Serial killing gay Andor bisexual presenting man
really ought to have made the woke police put a stop to this you know I guess
that's the only underfunded police force if this wave of apparent leftwing
censorship was as strong as critics to cry then Sandman would have been purged
from DC archives and yet instead Neil Gaiman is held up by a substantial queer
fan base many of whom celebrate him for exposing them to certain areas of
queerness in the first place perhaps you can say anything actually and turns out
that how you say something and who you are to say it is more important than what
is said in the 1990s the Corinthian targeted gays because police were almost
certainly never going to involve themselves in a rash of murdered vagrant gay
men it was playing on the reality of the situation in a very real way however
cultural sensibilities have since shifted but still he himself is an instance of
a very very bad piece of queer representation regardless of how we human people
can identify nightmares as queer which may be gaiman's saving Nuance here he is
a monster taking the form of a gay man to hunt them and even though there are a
few benign queer characters in Sandman the deck is stacked with morally gray or
messy queer characters not to mention desire's role as the primordial demon
twink my apologies if twink is an unsuitable descriptor for non-binary people
but I look at them I couldn't exist and quite frankly to the anti-woke folks
they are right if this was your average high budget built by committee TV
spectacle series these plot elements would absolutely get shot down by the
producers on paper these beats are way too zesty media that explicitly
villainized queer people is held to be another component of language from the
1990s Executives aren't exactly known for nuance so they tend to build blanket
rules for dos and downs and yet the Corinthian and desire are still here and
people may be thirsty for them regardless the diner lesbian with a temper is
here all of John Constantine's male messiness is now Joanna's safic messiness
and still gaimon maintains his staunch Bowie s queer following so if the woke
police did come for Gaiman what was his get out of jail free card it's
conceptually simple though actually quite complicated the simple explanation is
you have to care a lot and Care is demonstrated not something that you can just
declare politicians say they care about lots of things but demonstrate very
little when it comes to problematic queer characters and for those of us who are
queer we know many problematic queer people this is not explicitly forbidden but
it is kind of taboo while Gaiman made a bold start with Sandman he still had an
affectionate portrayal of an indescribably queer romance and good Omens
generally speaking de demonstrating positive queer folks in one work will
implore your audience to read new ons into the messy queers in another
regardless of just those two Gaiman has been incorporating not only queer
characters but even queer adjacent themes into his body of work ever since the
most infamous outside of his ear Fallen Crowley anyway was the notorious deified
gay sex scene in American Gods a burnt out salesman from the Middle East
struggles with his time in America while trying to Pedal goods for an ungrateful
family while in a taxi he relates to the driver how hard it is to keep up a
smile in the land of opportunity the pair become quite close through the ride
the cab driver it turns out is a Jin who immigrated to America well provided the
lore of American Gods it was the idea of a Jin who made the migration a
different version of the same iFit likely still exists in his homeland it's
complicated anyway they smash turns out they're both kind of equally
dissatisfied with how things are going the Gin is nowhere to be found the
morning after but has left his taxi driver's identification on the nightstand
only now with the salesman's face for the picture an opportunity for a new life
away from his oppressive family even though it's just a disconnected vignette in
a story it's still a heartfelt standout moment you may be deceived into thinking
this is about being gay but it's actually about being different and alone in a
place with too many people especially in our post 911 Western cultural
stereotype of the Arabian Peninsula it's significant to make this the spot for
graphic gay X in this great American novel don't read anything into it most of
the Great American novels are written by Brits it's important to remember that
at a period of time when Europe was tying up women and gay men and throwing them
into reasonably sized ponds to see if they floated to the surface thereby
indicating their connection to Witchcraft for which they would then be removed
from the water thoroughly dried and then burnt at the stake that Constantinople
at the same time was the cultural Progressive Hub of the world scientifically
culturally philosophically artistically it also possessed a massive swath of
Europeans who had fled as refugees from whatever Inquisition Crusade or ethnic
cleansing was going on in Continental Europe at the time the reason why I would
say that this and other instances of gaiman's queer Library perform so strongly
is that there's very little sensationalism regarding these characters that is he
doesn't really make a fuss about queer characters where we appear we're just
there there is nothing about the exchange that says oh look gay characters
they're just characters and then gay stuff happens sometimes but mostly they're
just characters who contribute to what he's trying to say the same purpose he
has for straight characters granted Gan also includes eluded queer characters in
his books and generally I'm annoyed by eluded characters however when Coraline
is told from the perspective of a 9-year-old the protagonist isn't really going
to read into why the two bickering elderly actresses in the basement flat are
living together again I'm only opposed to the illusion of queerness if it's a
crutch used to present the illusion to impressionable baby queers that they're
being seen as Gaiman has demonstrated a comfort level with queer characters the
decision to imply that these two characters are lesbians is based off of
artistic Vision rather than an uncertainty about the audience like with yurian
ice taking a moment away from the narrative flow to specify that these
characters fall under the queer umbrella would interrupt the underlying themes
if there ought to be a definition of forc inclusion then that would be it
Coraline is about a child developing the ability to recognize identity in other
people this woman is my mother because of EX this other woman who only looks
like my mother is not actually my mother and as it is a children's book having
more themes presented will detract from what young readers are meant to take
away from it and this is part of the consequences of being part of a community
that has been so gaslit into believing that half- asked inclusion can qualify as
representation any instance of representation needs to feature that rough gay
sex scene or just doesn't count there needs to be that soapbox moment where the
gay characters stand up and make a Love Is Love Speech there needs to be that
gratuitously horny gay character who is either desperate for a long-term
relationship or hits on everything incessantly to let the audience know that
he's gay do any of you realize how many comments I still get on the urion ice
video to this day aggressively arguing that the anime is bad representation
because you don't see lips touching during the kiss then again that video still
gets comments from usually straight women no hating but still who incessantly
deny that there's any queerness coded or otherwise present in that series the
pressure to exist as openly gay as possible in fiction has a toxic translation
to real life most gay people people don't think about their gayness and ways to
perpetuate it especially because these methods of self-promotion as established
in fiction Focus around either having or trying to get a committed boyfriend or
persevering over social pressures and persecution according to fiction the only
two gay Milestones that matter are coming out and boyfriend and I have concerns
for this community if we are internalizing these messages doubling back to good
Omens for a minute how is it possible in this circumstance for these characters
to fit into clearly cly defined visible representation they can't SL don't have
sex their genders are complete anachronistic chaos and they don't appear to
experience physical pleasure kissing is a gesture neiler angels and demons have
a concentration of nerve endings in their lips which result in a pleasant
sensation upon physical stimulation you you make up the rules about this so I'm
just wondering what would it take for these two to properly depict gay or queer
attitudes I highly doubt a cosmic entity would go on about love being love
especially when their relationship revolves around the world ending or not
especially when the majority of anti-gay discrimination revolves around
persecuting sexual acts however I would prefer we don't say that this is bad
representation because these are two very queer characters involved in a
non-sexual romance and since asexual people do exist believe it or not I think
that's pretty valid and so no not all representation needs to be about queer
acceptance or normalization sometimes it's nice to just see yourself in a quirky
character that isn't to say that's all we need to be sometimes times we really
do need messaging directed at us and messaging that normalizes us Gan also
happens to have some of that too though in Sandman no less granted this is
regarding a trans character and as per contemporary discussions about
appropriate trans representation there are some pitfalls I wouldn't want to try
and tell trans people what is or is not good representation for them though from
what I've read people seem to feel generally positive about this one Possible
season 2 spoilers ahead the game of you Arc of Sandman follows Barbara Barbie
from season 1 who journeyed with Martin ten bones to bring the porpentine to the
hierogram and who has since broken up with Ken she is best friends with Wanda
who is helping her figure out how to navigate New York City Wanda is trans and
though she never specifies to anyone I am trans this becomes apparent throughout
dialogue cues Wanda is talkative and we get a small glimpse into her trans
experience though she remains externally positive she trusts Barbara enough to
let her dead name slip though warns Barbara never to use it an antagonist
doesn't seem to approve of her though she can ignore him though Gaiman is subtle
enough to indicate that these bigoted remarks and encounters have an effect on
her and by subtle I mean that she has a dream where Bizarro aliens are forcing
her to choose to be a man or a woman decisions around gender affirming surgeries
are ultimately at the decision of the individual to undertake or not her dream
indicates that she is struggling internally with the pressure to make a
commitment through the progression of this story Wanda's Womanhood is routinely
challenged because she is uncomfortable with the idea of surgery at least at
this point in her life Wanda does die in the story and while this may fit into a
buried queer Trope it's worth noting that Wanda does not die because of bigotry
she dies when her building collapses in a freak hurricane which may or may not
have been caused by witchcraft it's also worth noting that Wanda's death is not
there to make the CIS characters react or to make the audience sad Barbara has
already undergone an emotional Arc and her appearance at Wanda's Southern
funeral her only New York friend to appear is to pay respects and cross out
Wanda's dead name on her tombstone and write her name over it in flamingo pink
lipstick however death has a different function in the Sandman Series where
death is a character herself and one may argue that death functions differently
in all of gaimon's Works Gaiman in general is very nonchalant about death even
when a character dies to propel the plot there's very little sensation derived
from it sometimes people die in fact in the graveyard book most of the
characters are dead G and treats death in fiction as if it is not the end of a
character and this is very literal in Sandman in this world most people who die
are taken by death to her realm a place the panels do not take us we understand
that just like any other character Wanda woke after her death and was greeted by
a compassionate woman to take her away but death is comfortable bending the
rules just a little bit very Case by case basis Barbara has a dream and she
remembers from this dream seeing Wanda Wanda here in death is fully feminized
and no this isn't telling us that death will make everything better this is
visual language to indicate that the cosmic forces of the universe recognize
your identity for who you are it's the same message of the entire Sandman series
emotional reality is more significant Than Physical reality which is a hell of a
debate to include in a comic book written by a CIS man like holy can you imagine
any of that happening today Mark the calendar and count the days until Wanda
appears in a trailer for an upcoming season of Sandman and people immediately to
cry everything's being about trans stuff these days however I did say that this
is a complicated process and gon especially in the long long ago before I read
it would have had to have had some real conversations with trans people to
really understand how to convey these themes the best of intentions is not
enough and in spite of Good Intentions things can go arai a category of that
contains Thomas Harris in his novel Silence of the Lambs the trans
representation is lacking the movie especially because it offers no insight into
trans attitudes at all in spite of depicting the villain the way they did would
you me the book actually goes to Great length to describe trans women and in
fact exonerate them hctor goes so far as to suggest that Jame gum cannot be
trans because they are violent Harris describes trans women as people who
transition to being women to live as women and for no other reason but
regardless of the fact that Harris does go out of his way to try and say the
trans people are okay what is depicted in the book sends a very harmful message
I would claim that Thomas Harris is someone who is trying to do a good thing
because the novel contains unambiguous language which declares that trans women
are not violent or antisocial without exception even if he kind of failed at
presenting that this is what he wrote I would contrast that with something like
Ace of vura which is actively malicious belittling and hateful forgive the
archaic phrasing but Hannibal says that b is not not a real transsexual but he
thinks he is he tries to be he's tried to be a lot of things I expect gum was
described as a disqualified outlier who fetishized Womanhood rather than someone
who felt that they actually were a woman if that makes sense it doesn't really
it's an e for effort situation really because there is a lot wrong with this yes
Harris seems to want to implore his audience to observe trans people with more
empathy while presenting a villain who is trans identifying and without
incorporating any other trans characters into the story whatsoever not even to
counterbalance bill this is all we got and what protrans rhetoric there was in
the novel was not so present in the film in conjunction Harris incorporates a
deeply triggering element of the trans experience in the book assist doctor
making claims about what does or does not qualify as Womanhood there is a
precedent for Built Tough trans women who have to pretend to be deeply invested
in pretty flowery dresses to get past their doctors contemporary queer Theory
and this is even presid in gan's discourse around Wanda holds that gender is
self-defined the only qualification to be a man woman or other is for you to
feel that way trying to justify your gender to a medical professional has been
historically one of the most arduous parts of the trans experience even though I
would not recommend diying your endocrine system without a medical professional
I feel the onus needs to be put on the medical community to establish more trust
many Physicians are working hard to mend this Gap yes but there's still progress
to be made a lot Harris however is an torious shut in it's clear that he
garnished his information from academic sources rather than the living breathing
component of a culture if you're trying to represent people then the people you
want to represent need to be where you start however good intentions alone
cannot and should not exonerate Herm that was brought into the world so if just
caring isn't enough how much more complicated does it need to be the more
complicated ated reality of good representation is that it's very difficult
cocktail of empathy as it intersects with the willingness to listen a compulsion
to profess the ability to reflect on certain people and situations there lies an
ability to isolate what elements of those experiences are endearing to reflect
back upon those people while having an understanding of what is or can be a
universal experience and what is or can be fictionalized for instance when it
comes to men writing women there was either not a a whole lot of attention given
to female characters in the first place or failed attempts to understand them
Helen of Troy was attributed to having spurred manalus and sparked the Trojan
War because Paris of Troy was just so darn pretty that motivation was so weak
even 2004 as Troy had to develop an entire subplot about how menus was so toxic
that Helen's only recourse was to leave with the first man who could smuggle her
out of Sparta men literally have fictionalized women as accessories to men
because historically patriarchal values in society would Define that as the role
of a woman it was only in the last century or so that a woman could open a bank
account without a man signing for it be it her father brother husband or gay
best friend for which he would still have unbridled access to it in much of
fiction women spend their time fussing over a man or dramatically falling into
his arms without any personal goals or motivations except to be with a
particular man even perceptively strong female characters like Scarlet O'Hara in
the end are solely focused on a man that isn't to say that you can't have men
who develop excellent fictional women in history but at the same time there is
no guarantee that women are going to write excellent female characters either
woman is not a monolithic experience for which every aspect of Womanhood is
accessible to every woman no one woman can embody all the experiences within
their gender but when you belong to one particular experience you may have an
easier time extrapolating on different manifestations of that experience I can
imagine myself as a different man because those experiences are tangentially
related to my experiences it's not that it's more difficult per se for a CIS man
to write a female character however it does require a great deal more research
empathy and observation Stephen King is pretty good at this there's a reason why
his first novel Carrie has become a regular in feminist Theory classes and queer
Theory watch my video on deep cuts to find out why he's also great at writing
female villains like with misery but when it usually comes to villains well
that's rough especially in America audiences tend to lean towards the idea that
the protagonist is the character whose values are meant to be emulated the
antagonist by contrast is demon which typically holds that everything about the
antagonist is a problem and ought to be shunned back to Gan how is it that the
weird queer kids flock to him in spite of desire and the Corinthian or other
less than flattering queer characters especially when he does not have a great
deal of openly queer Heroes the key there is that these characters are villains
because of their objectives and motivations but they are not villains because
they're queer and they are not villains because of their queerness and it's true
of most queer villains lately too we're beginning to make a comeback as villains
because of this not so simple trick and truly being able to have a character's
motivations separated from their identity isn't a talent every writer has though
it's far from the only important Talent out there but for those who can deliver
it generally makes for a better character to have intersectional compartments of
their personhood the secret to representation at its core is not to represent
end if representation is the goal it's going to suck the objective needs to be
life the author is not to look at themselves as a Creator but a gatekeeper their
role is to allow identities to be found where they are in real life to show the
hypothetical lives these people may lead to create an imagined version of this
person based on the kinds of people who live like this and it can't come from
nothing the best fiction is plagiarism of life even if it's fantasy especially
if it's fantasy because if your protagonists are jousting on griffins or
discovering Ancient Aliens under the ice caps the reader needs something human
to grab on to they really can only truly imagine something incredible the more
they can imagine a real person doing it I highlighted the queer element of
American Gods very deliberately it was a queer reference to a matter of a
pansexual deity that is very heavily supported by documented historical reality
given the current day cultural climate of this world that reality is selectively
forgotten we are disinclined to portray or even remember that because it does
not align with our present day perspective of the world gaimon's positive
betrayal of queer people begins with this he forces others to remember what they
willfully forget it seems to be part of the quintessential queer experience if
others like me had existed then others like me must exist now giman works to
spell out a Fantastical realm of Dreams where reality waffles and Imagination
runs wild all things are possible because the only rules that exist in this
place are the rules you bring to it we spend one-third of our lives in this
world of Dreams why wouldn't we want to spend it all there surely we can imagine
a world where all the Dow Grand challenges of our lives and societies become
Petty grievances that can be ignored we can be anything do anything so much more
than the limitations of our own world where we must share the dream of a
sleeping God our realities are at odds with other others and an absolute truth
for one is not an absolute truth for all however there is a pivotal weakness to
the dreaming and a pivotal limitation to dreams Powers though vast they may seem
dreams are lonely places when we sleep we are solitary save for the odd ghosts
drifting through through our dreams we confront the possibility of what the
world could be the world as we would make it if we could the world as we would
most fear it to become dreams cannot be our reality because Dreams Are Meant to
reflect reality and we can look at them as Idle entertainment or we could think
of it like slipping into a different existence in a change room just to see how
it looks though the advantage of Dreams is that we can make them real in a
fashion we can take what we like and work to make it true we can ward off what
we fear we can explore the fringes of our imagination in a way our waking Minds
would dismiss as Idol fantasy the extent of the world we want to create doesn't
need to end in dreams dreams are a mirror that can reflect the future for all
that we create our dreams without thinking it's still possible though
challenging to create our reality though it is easier to create a world we all
dream of together having a dream is not teasing a reality that could never be it
becomes an obligation to make it come true this video was brought to you by our
patrons like these awesome people you see on screen right now if you'd like to
support the channel and help us keep making queer content on YouTube which is
not the best at promoting queer content plus get to watch some of these videos
up to 6 months early you can sign up at the link in the pinned comment below and
if you like this video don't forget to like And subscribe thanks to all of our
patrons and thank you for watching [Music] I [Music] yeah