hello everyone my name is James and welcome to gay geek theory today I would
like to talk about something that I'm calling the Stonewall effect or maybe the
Stonewall film effect as someone who has gone to film school worked in the film
industry and then also gotten a business degree and worked in marketing I feel
like I have a pretty good view of the film industry from you know from a
distance a very far distance like surface of the Moon on October 31st distance
Hollywood has always had a love-hate relationship with the LGBT community though
we may dominate certain sections of the behind-the-scenes world gay men drag
queens and lesbians were only peppered throughout early cinema not really in
major roles but we were visible like Marlena Dietrich and Morocco this
gender-bending bisexual scene turned a lot of heads when the film came out in
1930 the characters were usually played for laughs but we were still represented
we were there on the big screen and you could tell it was encoded or subtle
those characters were gay gay gay gay gay gay and really movie goers didn't seem
to mind well most movie goers anyway you see movies were getting crazy or at
least that's what the religious Rite thought showing violent sex and
questionable moral behavior we're an easy way to get people talking about a
movie and then getting their butts in theater seats but a lot of Catholic and
Protestant groups just weren't having it and through a series of threats that
have had entire books written about them they forced the film industry as a
whole to start self censoring lest they become chained to the moral hem of those
opinionated Christians and so the Hays Code was introduced named after William
Hayes doesn't he look like a happy fella to begin censoring movies violence
could no longer be shown without the perpetrator getting has come up and somehow
death jail and repenting to God were all accepted outcomes nudity was a big
no-no there was no reasoning with them on that front and sexuality could only be
shown between married or committed couples again unless you show those horndogs
being punished for their nasty sex in some way basically all the fun was taken
out of the movies this was when mobster movie started to reel take off because
you could show all the violence you wanted but since the main characters
probably died in the end it was okay oh and homosexuality was outright banned in
the beginning shocker I know but clever writers and directors figured out ways
to get gay characters in the movies again just in a more coded veiled way even
movies as big as Ben Hur the 1959 version written by gay writer gore Vidal
included some homoerotic subtext though it was inserted without the knowledge of
lead actor Charlton Heston who would say it didn't exist until the day he died
and for the most part things basically stayed that way until the Hays Code
started falling apart in the 1960s movies like The Children's Hour the producers
and Midnight Cowboy started appearing Midnight Cowboy even won Best Picture
despite its ex rating from the MPAA which it got for a gay [ __ ] scene then in
1970 came the boys in the band which was the first big Hollywood movie that
featured an all-gay cast of all gay characters it was pretty big deal at the
time it would be a pretty big deal today we showed up here and there throughout
the 1970's and early 80's but nothing of note the gave hannah kicked in about
halfway through the 80s when AIDS was known as the gay cancer and gays became
Hollywood's best new villains we were psychotic evil bloodthirsty a whole group
of Jeffrey Dahmer's each and every one of us or we were dying of AIDS so we were
either dying or killing what had great decade the 80s were but then Bill Clinton
was elected president after 12 long years of Republican rule in the White House
and Hollywood started to ease up on us gays a little bit other than Silence of
the Lambs which the gays were not happy about I might make a whole other video
on that suffice to say we bitched about nothing the 1990s gave us some pretty
solid game movies Priscilla Queen of the desert to Wong foo thank you for
everything Julie Newmar The Birdcage Philadelphia my own Private Idaho 1997
alone gave us wild Kiss Me Guido in and out and gay inclusive films like as good
as it gets Boogie Nights in The Full Monty in 1999 we got the talented mr.
Ripley boys don't cry and cruel intentions I know not exactly happy portrayals
of gay characters but representation nonetheless things were looking up and with
the dawn of the new millennium queer as folk became one of the most talked-about
and eventually one of the most profitable TV shows in television history by the
end of its run queer as folk actually had to add an extra 15 minutes on to its
hour because so many people wanted to buy commercials that doesn't even happen
now then came the Bush administration and gay representation at least from
mainstream Hollywood studios seem to dry up sure we got the hours which didn't
turn a profit and some independent fare like Mambo Italiano and monster again
not exactly a positive portrayal and I guess you could argue that Chicago is
pretty gay and that Frodo and Sam might have had something going on the down-low
but you'd be reaching for the first few years the closest thing to a gay movie
that any major Hollywood studio put out was x-men 2 gay director Bryan Singer
slathered the mutant as gay metaphor all over that movie but just like the Lord
of the Rings in Chicago its subtext and we're looking for plain simple text here
then Along Came 2005 I like to think of 2005 as a test case for queer cinema
first up rent a rock opera about straights gays and bisexuals living and singing
together an AIDS infested early 90s New York City cost forty million dollars to
produce and made 31 million dollars at the worldwide box office here's some box
office info you may not actually know theaters take about half of the money that
a movie makes so a movie needs to make twice as much as its budget in order for
the studio to break even and that's not even counting the cost of advertising
the movie so when you look at it that way rent was an even bigger bomb next we
have Capote 7 million dollar production budget with a worldwide box office of
just under 50 million okay now we're talking nothing to write home about but at
least it turned a profit Hollywood is a business after all and they love making
money finally we have Brokeback Mountain a movie people are still angry about
not winning Best Picture at the Oscars this movie is sometimes credited as being
the moment a lot of Americans realize that gay people can actually love each
other and it's not just about sex made for 14 million dollars it brought in a
hundred and seventy eight million dollars at the worldwide box office those are
the kinds of numbers that Hollywood likes to see but here's the thing looking at
2005 from a business standpoint Brokeback Mountain is the outlier Capote did
well yes but not anywhere beyond what other movies of its ilk were doing at the
time or now meaning Oscar bait movies and of course rent was a total bomb so
Brokeback Mountain was the was breaking the rule that gay movies don't make
money so what would happen well Hollywood would test the gay community in 2006
we got running with scissors based on the best-selling book of the same name
producers were hoping for a big return sadly it was a terribly made movie and it
bombed producers and executives didn't see a bad movie that lost money though
they saw a gay movie that lost money in 2009 milk won two Oscars but failed to
turn a profit so now that we've got some contacts let me get to the reason why I
call this the Stonewall effect with the Stonewall film effect the next time
Hollywood as a studio system put real faith behind a gay movie was 20 15 10
years after Brokeback Mountain directed by Roland Emmerich the movie did what
every historical movie has done and whitewashed the story it wasn't drag queens
gay and transgender people of color who started the fight for gay rights it was
a pretty blond boy from Kansas or Nebraska one of the flat states because of
this there was a fierce campaign against the movie online boycotts were planned
and what Hollywood hoped would turn into the first gay blockbuster turned into a
massive tax write-off making only a hundred and eighty seven thousand dollars
worldwide yeah missin a few zeroes there guys so what is the Stonewall film
effect it's when a gay movie fails because of a reason other than being about
gay people Hollywood executives however don't see that they see a gay movie that
lost money they see a gay movie being protested gays boycotted Silence of the
Lambs in 1991 but it made 272 million dollars so it wasn't the boycott that made
Stonewall fail it was because it was about gay people audiences obviously don't
want gay movies maybe a supporting character and a cheap rom-com or chick flick
here and there but no lead roles you see every gay movie that fails fails
because it's a gay movie but every gay movie that succeeds succeeds for a
different reason case in point The Birdcage starred Robin Williams at his prime
Philadelphia starred Tom Hanks won him an Oscar Brokeback Mountain had two of
the hottest actors in Hollywood and happened right after George W Bush started
his campaign against gay marriage so there is a little sympathy now I'm not
saying these are the reasons that these movies succeeded but this is what
Hollywood executives tell themselves so where does that leave us well as a gay
man who would actually like to see some major gay characters in movies I'm at an
impasse from a business standpoint my view is that we meaning the LGBT community
should go out and see every movie that features LGBT characters whether they're
gay men lesbians bisexuals or transgender people see them all every one of them
in theaters and buy the blu-ray no matter how terrible they are but James that
means Hollywood will just keep making bad gay movies ah that's the
counter-argument and you know if we support movies like Stonewall which white
wash and sis washed history Hollywood we'll just keep making movies like that
fair argument and history kind of backs you up to a point for decades
african-americans were portrayed in two ways in movies dangerous criminals or
slaves that was it it's like the scary butch Dyke gay best friend or depressed
transgender person stereotypes the LGBT community hates but eventually you got
the blaxploitation movement in the 1970s which despite its name sound and kind
of- actually went a long way in introducing audiences to strong black characters
shaft and Foxy Brown for instance were they great movies not always sure we look
back and cringe at some of them now but they laid the groundwork for movies to
star Eddie Murphy in Denzel Washington in the 1990s and Mabel money doing it and
then that laid the groundwork for more overtly black movies like the Medea
series in the 2000s in the 2010s which then laid the groundwork for Black
Panther a 200 million dollar superhero movie with an almost all black cast
taking place in a technologically superior African nation no step-in Fetchit s--
here our main character a superhero is a king so where's our gay superhero they
do exist Marvel's wicked and hulling DC's Midnighter and Apollo so where are
they well they remain relegated to the pages of limited yet popular comic book
runs because we meaning the LGBTQ community haven't shown the Hollywood
executives that were willing to spend our money on gay movies we need to deal
with the bad gay movies like running with scissors rent and yes maybe even
Stonewall line up around the block to see them support them and put our
hard-earned dollars into the bloated wallets of Hollywood executives because
when they see bad gay movies succeeding they'll start buying up those good gay
movies whose screenplays get ignored in 2016 moonlight a gay and black movie was
made for 1.5 million dollars people heard it was good we heard it was good and
we went it made 65 million dollars worldwide for a movie about a gay black man
that's pretty good I'd say it's exceptional actually if you look at the
box-office performance of other movies like that so we've got one Oscar winning
box-office hit on our hands first time since Brokeback Mountain 10 years ago
over 10 years ago so what are we gonna do now this time are we going to ignore
the next LGBT inclusive movie because it wasn't made exactly like we wanted it
to be are we going to swallow our hear in queer pride and support LGBT cinema
even when it's not great because remember it took a lot of slave movies and
terrible comedies to get to black panther so let's show hollywood we mean
business the next time an LGBT inclusive movie hits a theater near you go take
friends see it twice even if you hate it because if it makes money we might just
get a gay superhero movie in the next years or a Stonewall movie that actually
tells the truth if gays have shown anything it's that we're good at forcing
otherwise slow processes to speed up change in Hollywood can make change in
Washington look damn near supersonic unless there's money involved you want gay
movies you want lesbian heroes bisexual leading man a transgender superhero
let's put our money where our mouths are and support gay cinema even the bad
ones you've got to start somewhere and after a century of cinema we're still at
the starting gate so what do you guys think I'd love to hear your opinions on
this so leave them in the comments below and I will see you in the next video
thanks for watching bye