foreign so the Hollywood Summer movie season is drawing to a close and the
prevailing message of the summer seems to be according to Industry professionals
at least that people are getting tired of the summer blockbuster with a few
exceptions like X-Men Days of Future Past Guardians of the Galaxy and the new
Ninja Turtles movie almost every medium to large budgeted movie has
underperformed especially at the domestic box office this is leading a lot of
people in Hollywood to wonder what went wrong why aren't people going to see
movies anymore and why aren't they going to see movies more than once the
economy isn't nearly as bad as it was in 2009 and that was the year Avatar made
almost 3 billion dollars so what the hell is going on here well the answer is
pretty simple really people aren't sick of Blockbusters they're not sick of
fantasy movie science fiction comedies horror superheroes westerns disaster
movies vampires werewolves or giant monsters people are sick of paying good
money to see bad movies the first example that comes to mind is this Summer's
Amazing Spider-Man 2. back in 2002 Sony basically gave the superhero genre the
shot of adrenaline it needed with Sam raimi's Spider-Man and followed it up in
2004 with what was probably be the best superhero movie at the time Spider-Man
2. and those movies made a ton of money for the studio but after a bad end of
the original trilogy and a reboot that didn't seem to have legs the Amazing
Spider-Man 2 seemed to be grasping at straws okay the movie wasn't terrible but
it wasn't nearly as good as any of the other Marvel inspired movies that came
out this year Watching it you could tell that Sony was more interested in
building up a world that they could spin off into a Cinematic Universe than they
were with telling a strong engaging cohesive story The Rhino was horrible
Electro seemed like he belonged to Nigel Schumacher Batman movie and the Green
Goblin should have been saved until the third installment granted Gwen Stacy's
final scene was fantastic and really heartbreaking but then they had to go and
ruin it with another scene with that god-awful Rhino and Sony moviegoers noticed
these imperfections why would they go again why would they tell their friends to
go why should they you made a subpar movie that despite some great work from
Andrew Garfield and Emma Stone seemed like nothing more than a soulless cash
grab before you launched the Spidey Cinematic Universe was it fun sure would I
pay to see it again probably not so of course now the Press is saying that
people are sick of Blockbusters and many saying that there is now Spider-Man
fatigue give me a break we're not sick of Spider-Man we're sick of you using him
as a money printing machine without actually caring about the characters in the
world are we sick of Blockbusters no are we sick of superhero movies obviously
not but it's not like it couldn't happen there was a science fiction explosion
after Star Wars came out in 1977 every producer of movie studio wanted to throw
their hat in the ring a few good movies came out of it like Ridley Scott's alien
but there was a whole lot of crap turned out of Hollywood science fiction mass
production machine they went from B movies to Z movies and people got sick of it
Hollywood didn't care about the quality of the movies as long as they got as
many of them out while Star Wars still burned bright eventually people stopped
going to see these trashy knockoffs though and Hollywood said obviously people
aren't interested in science fiction anymore and they stopped green lighting
Sci-Fi movies Blade Runner was a sad casualty of this a fantastic movie that
just happened to get rid right around the time when audiences had had enough of
the Hollywood Crab Fest it happened again in the 1980s with slasher movies
Halloween officially ushered in the age of the slasher in 1978 followed by
Friday the 13th in 1980 and A Nightmare on Elm Street in 1984. so Hollywood
started churning out slasher movies by the Dozen and like the science fiction
Trend before them they dropped lower and lower in quality until people stopped
going to see them they lived a bit longer because of the direct video Market but
they died too Hollywood said that the slasher was dead until screen came along
in 1996 and breathed new life into the genre only to have its throat cut quickly
again because of the hundred scream clones that came out in the coming years
Horror had another Renaissance in the early 2000s with saw but then had
countless torture porn copycats rushed to the box office and history repeated
itself yet again the exact same thing happened to westerns back in Hollywood's
golden age and fantasy movies after the release of Lord of the Rings has this
happened with superhero movies hell no has this happened to Spider-Man not quite
yet but I think Sony has to be careful it's not the Spider-Man has oversaturated
the market it's that the last three Spider-Man movies just haven't been that
good X-Men went through this a few years ago The Last Stand made a ton of money
off the Goodwill from X2 but people hated it it took almost a decade for the
X-Men movies to get back into the audience's good graces over the last couple of
years Warner Brothers has been shocked that their DC adaptations haven't blown
the Box off as wide open it's not that people don't like your characters it's
that you don't do a good job bringing them to the big screen except with Batman
most of the time the saddest thing about all of this is that it's we the
audience that basically gets punished for Hollywood's mistakes we lose out on
seeing some amazing movies because Hollywood thinks that their genres aren't in
right now Science Fiction with the exception of Star Wars has been on the outs
as far as Hollywood is concerned since the early 80s but Avatar the highest
grossing movie of all time is a science fiction movie Guardians of the Galaxy
opened well above expectations and is the definition of Science Fiction full
bore fantasy movies were verboten for decades then Along Came Lord of the Rings
no matter what genre it is if there is care put into the production if there's
relatable characters a great story some real emotion we will go see your movie
and if it's awesome we will go see it twice three four times hell I went to see
The Dark Knight five times while it was in theaters and I dragged people with me
every time we all do this if we love a movie we tell our friends and family that
they need to see it it just has to be good so Hollywood start paying attention
we're not sick of Spider-Man or slasher movies or science fiction or fantasy or
anything else we're sick of bad movies make some good ones we'll go see them
okay so what do you guys think do you agree with me that no matter what the
genre as long as the movie's good people will go see it or do you think that
people really do get sick of genres no matter how good the movies are like
subscribe and leave your comments below and I will see you with a new video soon