---
cite:
	rwrb_movie: "Red, White, and Royal Blue"
---
<h1>"Gay Happiness and Mainstream Media"</h1>
Also known as "The Agony / Anguish of Happy Gay Media".



<compare>
	<james>This video is brought to you by SquareSpace / Lilo</james>
	<comment>Prior to this video being released, he was having trouble getting a sponsorship from Lilo (a sex toy company) to not get the video age-gated. He eventually gave up and released it with a squarespace ad.</comment>
</compare>

<compare>
<james>

Visual: [Disclaimer]

I want to be absolutely clear upfront, so that you can be very assured where my intentions are going forward: I do not dislike any of the media that we're talking about in this video. In fact, I loved most of it, on the page and the screen. I'm not coming for any of the creators this time. But we do need to talk about this because there is clearly an issue here, and it's becoming a problem. But the issue doesn't really have a clear target to blame.

So let's hit the ground running and talk about *Red, White, and Royal Blue*, the recently released movie, based on the book by Casey McQuiston.

</james>
</compare>

<compare>
<cite></cite>
<james>

In the heart of the city of London, The Majestic Wedding Bells echo, announcing the matrimony of Prince Phillip, the eldest grandson of England's Monarch. The historic streets lined with iconic landmarks buzz with anticipation and excitement.

Among the swirl of dignitaries and celebrities is an individual who
attracts attention like a moth to a flame: Alex Claremont Diaz. He isn't just any attendee; he's the dynamic son of Ellen Claremont, a trailblazer who shattered glass ceilings by becoming the first woman to become the president of the United States.

However this evening amidst the sparkling chandeliers of the Grand Ballroom, something is amiss. The air thickens with tension and hush whispers traverse the room. At the heart of these murmur are Alex and Prince Henry, the younger sibling of the groom. Their contentious relationship is the stuff of social media legend. The simmering animosity between them reaches its crescendo when a relatively minor misunderstanding leads to them swimming in wedding cake,providing juicy content for the eager tabloids on both sides of the pond. 

The repercussions are immediate, with the impending reelection campaign of President Claremont, the scandal is ill timed, threatening to put a dent in her electoral armor. Damage control is of the essence. 

To smooth out ruffled feathers and placate the media's appetite for scandal, Alex and Henry are thrust into a meticulously orchestrated PR campaign. This facade aimed at showcasing their renewed friendship has them attending events, posing for pictures, and offering sound bites about their brotherly bond.

</james>
<from></from>
</compare>

<compare>
<cite>{{ cite.rwrb_movie }}</cite>
<clip>Alex: What three words would I use to describe Henry? White, blonde, and British.</clip>
</compare>

<compare>
<cite></cite>
<james>

During one such contrived rendezvous, after a security breach lands them both locked in a cramped broom closet, Alex's guard crumbles. He divulges the root of his resentment stemming from a slight he felt from Henry during one of his initial forays into the international stage. This heartfelt confession, laced with vulnerability, moves Henry.Recognizing the weight of the misunderstanding, he extends a genuine gesture of reconciliation. Late night texts replace terse exchanges, humor replaces hostility, and slowly they start to build a bond, peppered with light-hearted jabs and shared inside jokes.

</james>
<from></from>
</compare>

<compare>
<cite></cite>
<james>
</james>
<from></from>
</compare>

<compare>
<cite></cite>
<james>
</james>
<from></from>
</compare>



<!--


 however
relationships are rarely linear at the extravagant New Year celebration hosted
by Alex emotions bubble to the surface when the clock strikes midnight a buoyant
Alex loses loses himself in the festivities this does not sit well with the
Prince Henry's sudden and unexplained departure hints at unspoken sentiments
driven by an overwhelming fear of maybe losing Henry Alex seeks him out in the
Serene White House Gardens confusion leads to a kiss from the prince who like
any man then spends the next several weeks ignoring Alex's texts and phone calls
a normal gay experience yes weeks later at a presidential dinner Alex reunites
with Henry and the pair end up hooking up the PA enter into a Friends with
Benefits relationship although they keep their involvement secret Duty and
responsibilities however have their own demands the Electoral Battlefield
beckons and Alex finds himself in Texas championing his mother's campaign
because this is a romantic fantasy the idea of Texas voting for a Democratic
president is actually possible he later travels to Brooklyn to speak at the
Democratic National Convention where Henry unexpectedly visits him this leads to
these friends with benefits becoming something closer cler than just friends
Alex even comes out to his mother as bisexual she's very supportive maybe even
too supportive when she starts recommending that he go on prep but advises him
to think about his relationship carefully a public relationship between the
first son and the prince of England could change their lives forever their story
however is far from a fairy tale ending Henry visits Alex at the scene at
Claremont Vacation House near Austin Texas out on the lake just when Alex is on
the cusp of sharing his deepest feelings with with Henry the panicked Prince
throws himself into the lake and soon leaves escaping to England but love with
its tenacity Spurs Alex on he pursues Henry across the ocean seeking answers
drenched from the English rain Alex demands to know why Henry has basically
abandoned him Henry admits that he loves Alex just as Alex loves him but
explains that his Royal position makes a gay relationship impossible for him but
Alex with those eyelashes of his manages to convince Henry that their
relationship is worth fighting for and the the two reconcile and commit to being
together yet Destiny has more challenges waiting in the wings their intimate
emails and texts a window to their evolving Love Story are maliciously exposed
by a spurned x of Alex's creating a media melstrom Alex uses this as an
opportunity to come out publicly and own his sexuality and his love for Henry
giving a moving speech that makes him the figurehead for queer America but
things don't go so well for Henry whose family has all but sequestered him away
from the public at large but thanks to some deaf maneuvering on the part of
allies on both sides Alex and Henry reunite in London and prepare to confront
the king of England about Henry being allowed to be his own man a tur
confrontation follows but is interrupted by the sounds in the streets the public
have come to support Henry despite what his family may want and going against
the wishes of the crown Henry chooses Alex the climax of the story coincides
with the US elections polls are tight and Alex's family is preparing for bad
news the only thing keeping Alex together is is Henry by his side as his mother
prepares a concession speech news comes from Texas in the most fairy tale
moments since Cinderella's fairy godmother turned a pumpkin into a carriage
Texas goes blue securing a second term for president Claremont Alex's tireless
efforts combined with Henry's unwavering support Mark a dual Victory one
political and one personal the movie ends as they celebrate away from the media
glare in the Tranquil surroundings of Alex's childhood home in Austin this video
is brought to you by Squarespace Squarespace is an all-in-one web design and
hosting platform that makes it easy for you to create a website and Market your
brand with industry-leading website templates that are easy to customize you
don't need any design experience to show the world your best digital self
Squarespace also makes it easy to keep in touch with your audience or customers
with their expertly designed email templates that are just as easy to customize
as their websites you can follow up with customers or just keep your audience in
the loop with your latest updates that's why we're launching a newsletter with
certain social media sites going the way of the dodo we wanted a way to keep in
touch with our amazing subscribers and Squarespace gives us the perfect way to
do that in fact you can sign up for our newsletter right now which will include
links to new videos progress updates for Telos pictures as well as reviews
articles and so much more you can sign up for free at our Squarespace website
jameson.com you can head to squarespace.com right now for a free trial and when
you're ready to launch your site go to Squarespace / James that's j m s to save
10% off of your first purchase of a website or domain start showing the world
how amazing you are today with Squarespace so red white and royal blue might
read like The Ultimate wh if scenario but strip away the international diplomacy
and Royal trappings and you got yourself a pretty straightforward romance two
guys falling for each other when they least expect it groundbreaking now if
you're familiar with the romance genre you'll know that it's not exactly
bursting at the seams with gay love stories that don't take a tragic turn and
mainstream romcoms well they've historically stuck to the script of snowflakes
and sanitized kisses with the steamier stuff being left implied if it's
acknowledged at all explicitly sexual gay romcoms are like unicorns mythically
rare and to some potentially unsettling in this narrative Alex and Henry's all
consuming infatuation anchors the plot they're the kind of into to deep that has
them gambling everything on a chance at happiness and sure with Alex's mom in
full campaign mode and Henry sporting a crown usually metaphorically their
romance isn't exactly publicity friendly but the fireworks happen offstage their
text messages a master class in building sexual tension and they together
moments well let's just say they're explosive in the clutcher pearls kind of way
especially in the book they make up for lost time as it were the story kind of
saunters into this this Lial space it's not pure handholding puppy love like in
heartstopper but it's also not quite at the level of pay-per-view eroticism that
you'd find an elite it's sweet sure endearing even to the most cynical of us but
it also packs enough heat to make you want to crack open a window my full name
is Henry George Edward James Hanover Stewart Fox and I thought Alexander Gabriel
Claremont Diaz was a mouthful he is and yeah it got heat of the not so great
kind uh we're talking about think pieces from places like The Huffington Post
and the BBC getting their knickers in a Twist over the movie's excessive
sexiness The Twist some of these naysayers were gay men it's a bit of a the call
is coming from inside of the house moment when queer people themselves openly
admit to being comfortable watching straight sex in movies but are turned away
by the sight of boys kissing especially due to how relatively tame red white and
Royal Blue's sex was compared to other game media released in recent memory the
bulk of criticism however was found on social media where straight people seemed
to be confused and shocked that gay men had sex at all the references and the
one particular sex scene which seemed like a Rubik's Cube to some straight
viewers were too much for an audience that had been raised on the sexless gay
best friend sidekick character it's almost as if someone asked do gay characters
have sexual encounters how do they do this when they're both facing each other
what kind of Witchcraft is this as a result they rushed to the internet first to
investigate how the missionary position could possibly work with gays and then
to express their dissatisfaction with the situation there's a strong
undercurrent of hypocrisy here particularly as queer folk of literally every
shade of the rainbow are accused of corrupting the youth never mind that it was
perfectly acceptable for virtually every American Teen Movie to focus with laser
Precision on rooting for teenagers to Bone each other the American piie
franchise owes its whole success to this for which audiences agree that the
heterosexual events in American Pi are normal but when it's gay it's
sexualization echoing a sentiment quietly expressed in culture straight is
normal and everything else that is outside of normal must be scrutinized for how
it may corrupt the normal which is the most irrational thought process presented
in this essay and I will note just in case YouTube makes me cut the footage of
said scene the main sex scene in red white and royal blue entirely focuses on
faces it's all about the emotional intimacy between two people and less about
the raw sex which isn't even raw by the way because they make a point of using a
condom which a lot of gay viewers laughed at because we're in the age of prep
but two things one Prince Henry probably couldn't go on prep without it causing
a scandal and two there are STDs other than HIV guys this is why syphilis is
resurging and why we're getting antibiotic resistant strains of Gonorrhea now
wrap it up in any case according to what I've gathered the majority of viewers
who were offended were heterosexual women who were apparently exposed to gay
content for the first time in their lives be a Heart Stopper which huge props to
Heart Stopper by the way for opening people's minds to the concept that boy
kissing is all right but when that's their only exposure I can understand how
legs up anal penetration may leave them surprised however they were so taken
aback that they criticized the film for having an excessive amount of sexual
content which once more is one scene and in both a physical and figurative sense
it's not quite as steem me as the sex scene that took place between Rose and
Jack and the car in Titanic they were shut down online pretty quickly by a huge
swath of fans made up mostly of women but to my delightful surprise a lot of gay
men as well who told them to pipe down and accept that sex exists thank you but
for a few days this very very vocal minority were making it seem like Alex and
Henry having sex in the most basic position known to humankind while using a
condom and even to my recollection being under the bed sheets was compared on a
onetoone basis as as the third day of a meth orgy so why is it that they were
perfectly fine with Nick and Charlie kissing up a storm on heartstopper writing
fanfiction about it and creating countless fan edits on Tik Tok but basically
formed a covenant the minute Alex pushed Henry's knees up to his chest I'd like
to see the reaction to well any episode of que's folk now was this just because
they've never been exposed to the idea of gay sex before were they homophobic
were they secret prageru plants out to kill the movie were they sex negative in
general or have we as a society simply conditioned a large swath of the populace
to think of gays as completely nonsexual objects something that plenty of people
like having around but keep at a distance just far enough away to not have to
know too much about it they know that men have sex with men and women have sex
with women but they're really I outb by the idea of knowing the ins and outs and
tops and bottoms of it all good thing Henry didn't eat any beans before the
scene or that could have brought up even more uncomfortable questions the
controversy about the sex in red white and royal blue while quickly suppressed
seems to paint an ill- fated Omen about the condition of gay men and possibly by
extension all of queerness and the ability to be open about sex lives especially
in the same comfort that straight creators depict straight sex through a latent
process of judging gayness in media the straight audience can pass a stamp of
approval or condemn certain media and in the process we can perhaps perceive the
hetero hegemony as dictating how or how not to be gay and simply by how
overwhelmingly large the straight audience is their dictation of what good gay
representation is drowns out what gay men describe as good gay representation
this is the fear anyway and though I believe it is irrational the fear comes
from a very real very valid place especially as a conservative wave once again
washes Across America and sections of Europe which tries to insist that queer
sex should be pushed back into the closet or should simply cease to exist
altogether which is how they also feel about various queer people political gay
fears seem to be realized through the mass audien's reaction to gay characters
in media in conjunction with criticisms against relatively tame gay sex in one
movie the celebration of sexless queer characters in another piece of queer
media seems to Echo a 1950s abstinence mandate that says to Modern young queer
people you'll be accepted if you're less like the characters in red white and
royal blue and more like the characters in heartstopper let's take a closer look
at heartstopper for a moment this series skips the usual over-the-top drama and
instead captures the sweet sometimes clumsy moments of teen love it centers
around two characters Charlie spring played by Joe lock and Nick Nelson played
by kit con their story takes place in a typical English high school and unfolds
slowly and gently with each episode moving the story forward toward a satisfying
emotional climax the story carefully takes us through their personal Journeys
the difficulties they face with bullying and the joy of finding someone who
truly understands them all without becoming overly sad or dramatic the show has
a light touch that perfectly captures how Straits have been telling us first
love feels for centuries the show gives us a real look at Charlie as he deals
with his sexuality and the need to be accepted he's not just a stereotype he's a
fully developed character going through the ups and downs of first love in a
very real way as for Nick the show does a good job of showing his journey of
understanding that he's bisexual it talks about the confusion and moments of
clarity that come with figuring out who you are the series handles these complex
topics with a gentle touch that's both admirable and sweet Heart Stopper also
shows the diverse experience of different people in the queer Community each
character has a different story reminding us that everyone's journey is unique
but there's still a common hope and strength that they all share the show is
also notable or maybe notorious for not focusing too much on the sexual aspects
of Nick and Charlie's relationship this makes heartstopper a strong argument
against the idea that gay stories are inherently too focused on sex and
therefore unsafe for kids or young people to watch but while creating a story
focused on the sweet and cute over the hot and bothered has attracted an
audience that might not usually watch a show about queer characters it's also
seemed to alienate a large swath of the queer Community there's been a rather
weird reaction to the second season of the show in particular for instance drag
queens Trixie and Kata have a YouTube series where they review Netflix shows and
movies called Queens who like to watch when they reviewed the first season among
High fan demand and even higher personal hesitation it seemed the only point of
contention was that Trixie seem to be irritated by the cute depiction of gay
people that can often have a was feeling exploited and patronized while katata
liked how cute it was fast forward to season 2 and even katata was over the
cuteness and wanted to see something a bit more grown up or at least see the
character's relationships Advance Beyond hugging even if it was offscreen the
first season was cute but ask anyone who's been married for more than 10 years
those cute things about your significant others start to get annoying real quick
cute wasn't cutting it anymore gay people were cute when I was growing up in the
same way way that a Geral or a guinea pig would be cute caged fond over taken
out to play with but ignored when no longer novel and at the time probably dead
within 2 years it felt patronizing to be reduced to this we were either neutered
and cute such as in teen Focus TV shows or sexually active and eventually dead
such as in movies like Brokeback Mountain tell me the puritanical moralization
of sexual values doesn't exist anymore many creators lean toward this over the
years as a way to show gay representation without pissing off the Straits too
much so I can understand why some people in the gay community especially men my
age who grew up with the Trope of the sexist gay best friend like Trixie would
be irritated by it even now when there is pretty mainstream gay movies and shows
that do show the sex stuff like young Royals and Elite but like I said ki's
opinions seem to shift between the two seasons our Queens who watch looked at
this story about a collection of various queer 15 and 16year olds and they spent
the duration of their video railing it because well nobody was getting railed at
a context I found this reaction a little bit cringy and truthfully the only time
I really saw Trixie and caught him miss a Mark heartstopper isn't a show about
sex so why should it be all about sex they didn't want to see the characters
having sex they just wanted to know that it was happening or building up to
happening because that seemed more realistic to them and their experiences to be
clear gay people do not want to see these characters having sex but gay people
do want to know that gay sexuality is allowed to exist media that divorces
sexuality from from identity is to some annoying at best and triggering at worst
not to paint Trixie and katcha in a bad light they're hardly alone in fact
they're not even the first to have this reaction there was a slew of gay men and
queer people in general who held nothing but contempt for heartstopper from the
word go and not even necessarily for the aformentioned reasons there were many
who felt that heartstopper was simply too edgeless and seemed to be presenting a
purity mandate projected at the entire queer Community not unlike the messaging
jeed at women in general there is a trend among discourse among women about the
allotted role of a woman in the patriarchal power structure men typically want
women to be sexually experienced but they also seem to allocate a role for women
that holds them to a particular sexual Purity it's a double standard for sure we
have to to be a boss but you can't be mean you have to lead but you can't squash
other people's ideas you're supposed to love being a mother but don't talk about
your kids all the damn time the Madonna horror complex exists for a reason you
marry the nice girl not the one who'll give you a in a movie theater this
bothered alenis Moret so severely that she made one of the greatest songs of all
time because of it suffice to say women have made it clear that they don't like
having the parameters of their sexual qualifications gauged by a group outside
of women and I get it that's an annoying because on top of doing what you want
to do there is a looming social decorum of what Society not only expects you to
do but will penalize you for not doing all the while on the example of sexuality
there are other groups of people who can do all the kinds of sexuality things
that they want without any kind of repercussion heartstopper seems to trigger
these fears for some gay men there is a perception that the show is presenting
an argument that the typical normal healthy gay teenage relationship should only
be as physical as hugging and a couple of kisses for which this is compounded
through several other high-profile instances of gay media specifically one which
made waves in 2018 but that I will not explicitly mention for reasons if you
know you know even though I highly doubt that developing a normative argument
that gay men need to hold themselves to a willful self-directed abstinence
program to be considered valid by Society at large was Alice osan's objective to
be clear I do not under any circumstances believe that Alice Osan is trying to
reaet queer sexuality sex is omitted from their work as per their license as a
Creator but they do not shame sex in their work outside of Oman there is a fear
of an external party dictating what is and is not acceptable sexual behavior
among queer people this fear wouldn't be valid were it not for a small army of
people who are currently trying to insist that any queer visibility exists to
indoctrinate and corrupt the youth of today media that so much as slightly leans
towards that sentiment even if only perceived triggers this whole Cascade of
hasty generalizations in our post Disney acquisition of Star Wars World we've
started to conflate the creation Creator and attitudes of a fandom we crossed
those three wires a lot and we perceive that the way a phandom is interacting
with a particular example of media as being the intended meaning of said Media
or even the values of the Creator themselves take for instance the recent event
of Zach Snider hiring a transgender writer to write the prequel comic book for
his upcoming movie Rebel Moon a portion of his fan base made up of red pill
basement dwellers were horrified to learn that he in fact isn't a horrible
person like them these are also the people who think homelander is the good guy
so just because there are some people holding up Nick and Charlie as the
archetype of how gay boys ought to express their affection does not mean that
this is what the media is intending my willingness to afford the benefit of the
doubt to aler swath of gays including Trixie and Kata is that they don't want to
directly observe the sex lives of these characters but rather comes from an
annoyance for a condition of gay acceptance being to follow not only the Purity
standards of straight people but specifically the Purity standards that are
imposed on straight women this may even betray a thought pattern in society even
from our allies that indicates that Society at large still does not view gay men
as actual men external factions that dictate what our sex lives ought to be are
based on the model of what straight people deem to be acceptable when in reality
queer psychosexual development happens quite differently especially in
adolescence during a formative age of communication skills gender is a cultural
barrier between girls and boys this fluid line of same gender communication
facilitates a greater opening for interpersonal exploration at an earlier age
this changes the way queer people approach sex this leads to a general Comfort
towards sexuality in queer circles and also why it's troubling to see sex
negative sentiments arising from inside the community even if a queer person is
a late bloomer so to speak they are conditioned by a communal culture that was
shaped by early bloomers and thus tend to slip into the way of thinking
regardless and it's also why the same jokes about the sex lives of gay men do
not apply to gay women and vice versa the result is a set of sexual expectations
that are almost completely inverted from heteronormative expectations for
instance second base for straight people is apparently coping a feel over
clothing second base for gay men is according to patterns is anal penetration
weirdly gay bases are reversed from the straight ones the Home Run system is a
gauge used to measure physical intimacy and commitment where straight people
tend to view sex as a reward for enduring a slow escalation of physicality gay
people start with oral on base one and eventually come around to home base which
is holding hands in public and it's highly coveted gay men only want one thing
and it's disgusting gusting while second base for lesbians is reportedly a
U-Haul now there's nothing wrong with depicting gay people not having sex if we
want our queerness defined based on internal merits rather than owing public
validation to having someone's hand to hold then this is Paramount subsequently
AO Ace isn't the only expression of asexuality you can be gay and Ace at the
same time developing sexuality doesn't mean that we need to see the characters
doing it but but people in the heat of budding sexuality are bound to experiment
a bit it would be something that they would talk about like confirmation through
dialogue it doesn't have to follow Elite's footsteps but just like being gay or
trans not everyone who self-identifies as a sexual now always knew that about
themselves sex is like broccoli to know you don't like broccoli you first kind
of have to eat broccoli there's even a chemical in broccoli that you can only
taste if you have a very specific active Gene those who have it find broccoli to
be rancid they physiologically cannot enjoy this vegetable for everyone else
it's great it's good it's fine given society's push to present sex as
pleasurable many start by trying it out and then spend maybe even years trying
to figure out why it's not working for them keep in mind that asexual doesn't
always mean no sex drive Ace like everything else in sexuality is not only a
spectrum but a matrix this is pertinent as heartstopper author Alice Osman
self-identifies as asexual thems which likely means that as per the Stanley rule
of write the stuff you wish you could read they want romantic drama that isn't
just focused around sex and that should be that it should be abundantly okay for
this kind of media to exist just as it should be abundantly okay for young
Royals and Elite to exist there is a compelling case for queer media to portray
the more innocent aspects of life story of friendship Adventure Coming of Age
familial bonds and the quotidian Joys and struggles that make up the human
experience these stories matter because they reinforce the idea that we queers
are not defined solely by our sexuality by diversifying the types of stories
told within LGBT media we affirm that queer people lead Rich complex lives that
are worth depicting in all their facets not just in relationship to their sexual
identity portraying a range of stories from the queer perspective also
dismantles the misconception that our narratives are inherently adult or
explicit it challenges the strawman fallacy that the presence of queer
characters in themes just makes something inappropriate for young audiences
hopefully creating a space for even more conservative parents to let their kids
watch this media and feel a little bit less alone in the world heartstopper
fills this role perfectly but we also have to accept that not every queer story
should be so innocent when it comes to drag queens and gay performers especially
those who tour they encounter an astronomical number of gay and queer people
especially among other performers they get to know each other quite well
including stories of their teenage years and this includes my own discussions
with queer people seriously it's one of those like wait everyone else was having
sex it seems that in high school for a lot of gays they took the opportunity to
dive deep into experimentation heartstopper is a direct contradiction of what
many had either experienced directly or by proxy and so it feels like it's
trying to develop a puritanical objective for young gay men alternately and this
is touching on the handholding part of Heart Stopper is that for gays of a
certain generation and by that I mean neither too old nor too young being
confronted by heartstopper under the assumption that it is meant to mimic
reality is triggering believe me a lot of gays would have loved to instantly
find a high school boyfriend with whom they felt comfortable enough to explore
emotional intimacy and hold hands the gay home run as it were however this
generation who are in their late 20s and early 40s now my generation may have
very well wanted this experience but we came of age when being out and gay as a
teenager wasn't trending if you don't mind my flippancy for myself and others we
were the only out gay in school and so seeing something like heartstopper may
feel like a culture is telling us that we were doing it wrong alternately for
those who didn't even know that they were gay as a teenager let alone come out
heartstopper is a reminder of what could have been again again again this is a
community yes even the CIS gay men who have undergone complex trauma that we as
a society still do not recognize as trauma for all that even the staunchest
Allies do to make coming out easier today we still have to come out in a society
which is grandfathered in a myriad of cultural attitudes that are incompatible
with queerness which create natural obstacles for us we exist in an operating
system that is not designed for us the trauma comes with Society placing the
burden of integration on us Society does not truly acknowledge this as trauma
because social understanding of queer trauma is related to bigotry and not the
complex constructed from watching your straight CIS friends be able to live out
a number of Life Experiences as they see fit whereas the queer individual having
been raised under the assumption that they are straight Andor CIS must make
concessions and compromises based on how soon or late they shift into their
queerness combined with media that dictates queer experiences they are going to
be across theboard feelings of I lived my life the wrong way you are dealing
with this group of people when you develop queer media we're a tough crowd and
rest assured it's not all our fault with the amount of com Lex trauma residing
in this group it makes perfect sense that a piece of media meant to uplift and
Inspire the lgbtqia will have the inverse unintended effect of telling many of
these people that they messed up and that missing out on all those experiences
is their fault and no you can't go back and fix it like I came out when I was 12
and I haven't had an actual boyfriend my whole life many gay people cope with
this by telling themselves that their teenage fantasies were simply impossible
media instances that refute this without explanation may very well feel like
direct personal criticism for having trauma trauma trauma trauma generational
trauma trauma trauma this is what trauma looks like these are the feelings that
Heart Stopper digs up in some people so it makes perfect sense why the criticism
would be so focused on presenting sexuality in a show that is neither focused on
it nor is it required it makes sense perhaps but it is irrational even though
trauma itself is valid there is an onus on the individual to respect their own
trauma without pushing it out into the world but that's just Heart Stopper what
of the opposite an inability to consume media that is sexual because it presents
those same sensations of queer fomo perhaps this is why some gay people are
uncomfortable with seeing gay sex in their streaming movies not because they're
squeamish about dicks and butts but because it's hearkening to a painful
reminder of what they feel like this movie is telling them they missed out on
and I'm sorry for how polarizing this video is I know it must seem like I'm
jumping around a lot if I'm not settling on a clear critical Target it's because
I'm not trying to Target anyone when in fact I'm trying to defend media's
ability to exist as a Creator's Vision but also defend why queer people have
such a dodgy relationship with media featuring queer people nobody's really in
the wrong here except of course Millennia of puritanical imperialism and
postcolonial patriarchal values that have resulted in us feeling like we're
overdue for a little dignity and autonomy in regards to queer resistance around
media I see two issues the first being that queer people including gay men have
been so underrepresented for so long and Tabo predominantly represented by
depictions that moralize US based on hedonistic etiquette we feel an obligation
to watch queer media where we are featured in the hopes that it will break the
representation glass ceiling this is particularly more true for wide relase
high-profile examples of queer media this is why Bros Got rave reviews from
mainstream critics while Fire Island was mostly ignored it's also a very erratic
circumstance of media criticism where red white and royal blue was targeted for
its sexiness but Bros upon release was hailed as the Advent of queer acceptance
among mainstream critics even though it had a lot more sex among a lot more
people and was not nearly as good we're shooting ourselves in the foot by
following Trends highly promoted queerness is queerness that has been bespoke to
have as much appeal to straight audiences as possible think Brokeback Mountain
would that have been as successful had it not starred two heart throbs that
women wet their panties over and who simultaneously came across as Butch enough
for straight guys to feel comfortable with the problem in practice is that this
obligation implores us to watch media we simply may not be interested in either
outside of our preferred genre gen or featuring casting that we don't like or
something which may contain triggering elements that we don't even know are
triggers simply because we don't consider existing in a society that does not
accommodate our identities as cptsd trauma the second issue is as per an
unawareness of said complex trauma we are unable to compartmentalize a negative
reaction to Media as a trauma response in which case we try to intellectualize
by interpreting this media as making a normative argument about all of gay
people so like to quote an incredibly problematic white man dude sometimes a
cigar is just a cigar heartstopper is just trying to be heartstopper not every
artist or author is out there trying to make a fictional Manifesto out to
reflect and shape the world I don't think this is limited exclusively to queer
people but we seem to take every instance of queer representation as a Manifesto
we treat these media as if each one is actively trying to set a universal
precedent for the state of modern queerness sometimes this is true like with
Barbie which was a movie about Womanhood the interaction between wom and the
idea of woman and where men may fit into this idea at which point you are
allowed to disagree with the premises and conclusions of the movie you're also
allowed to disagree with some finer points and some nitpicky elements of the
conclusion but overall enjoy the movie or appreciate that it exists slightly
disagree does not need to mean burn it in a fire this is probably the clearest
problem that exists Within leftist spaces today that is a fallacy of composition
it's not intellectual and it's certainly not sexy you know who does that the
alt-right Disney made this movie about a strong female character so the entire
company now has a woke agenda apparently and so on and so forth the difference
being that those on the right at the very least generally agree on who to hate
we're letting them divide us we have a reluctance to let queer media be
fantasies instead as we're starved for visibility we look at each one as the
media that might make or break our personal autonomy heartstopper is a fantasy
red white and royal blue is a fantasy young Royals is a fantasy because for all
that heartstopper may be seen as an early indicator of a total failure of queer
writs it's certainly an outlier next to a larger body of work that includes the
aention media and many others heartstopper might be popular but red white and
royal blue is the most watched Amazon Prime movie in the history of the Sur the
issue is not with heartstopper but a fear of living in a population that leans
toward that as the only acceptable manifestation of queer expressions of
affection which is not an issue with the media but rather the way we seem to
expect these instances of representation to apply to the whole of queerness and
that rather than finding red white and royal blue wanting for not being able to
present the multitudinous range of queerness we can observe these pieces of
media as being pieces of a growing whole which seems to be leaning to Greater
inclusivity as it grows this feels like a popularity contest where the largest
fandom gets to decide what is and is not an acceptable expression of queer
specifically gay love and the people who have the smaller Voice next to a large
fandom of teenage girls are gay people the fear is rooted in a sensation of not
having control over our own depictions that are projected to queer people
because it's these fictional examples that are held up as Arch types for real
people to be compared to one must acknowledge the historic invisibility of gay
narratives within the mainstream media landscape the journey from non-existence
to the peripheries and at long last to have media with as diverse portrayals as
heartstopper young Royals red white and royal blue not to mention more adult
focused media has been a sopian task for the gay community this Travers has been
marred by periods of grotesque caricature and an almost vois Safari ISM that
othered and fetishized gay relationships casting them in a light that shimmered
with Scandal rather than substance and these types of portrayals are far from
Gone especially in other parts of the world but that's a different video sign up
for the patreon to get us there yet as the pendulum swung towards inclusivity a
new critique arose from the old prejudices the claim that gay media is too
sexualized conceal the age-old detraction of the gays themselves are too sexual
in some sense this reflects a societal discomfort with the candid portrayal of
homosexual Love and Desire it is as if the very Act of two men or two women
expressing their sexuality must be shrouded in a chased Veil lest the onlooker
be confronted with the unvarnished truth of affection and maybe even have to
rethink their own inner feelings moreover this assessment often stems from a
myopic view of gay media taking as its evidence a narrow selection of works that
are intentionally provocative or which challenge societal Norms around sex and
sexuality to paint the entirety of gay media with such a broad brush is to
ignore the rich tapestry of stories that span the spectrum of experience from
the platonic and the familial to the romantic and yes even the sexual to deny
the sexual component of gay relationships in media is to deny a fundamental
aspect of human connection regardless of orientation sexuality after all is a
potent element of The Human Condition and its representation in art and
storytelling has long been a conduit for deeper understanding a mirror
reflecting the complexities of love lust and longing heteronormative narratives
have long enjoyed the privileged of unabashed sexual expression without inviting
the same level of scrutiny in contrast gay media often faces a double-edged
sword a clamoring for representation on one hand and a prudish recoil at the
manifestation of that representation on the other there exists an unspoken rule
it seems that gay characters must not only be present but must also comport
themselves in a manner palatable to the heterosexual majority their sexuality
expressed with a modesty that is seldom demanded of The Straits is it not then a
form of cultural suppression to dictate the terms of representation to confine
the narratives of a community to the narrow confines of what is deemed
acceptable by those who wield the loudest voices gay media in its Essence is a
rebellion against such constraints a declaration that love in its Myriad forms
will no longer be relegated to the Shadows perhaps there are naturally going to
be various push back consequences when dealing with a large group of people who
have been jerked around let on and outright lied to for decades knowing our
history can establish a context for why we Face the struggles we do but also
offer us insight into what methods work to create change and what methods don't
spoiler alert for gay rights being loud obnoxious and altogether ungrateful and
shoving our sexuality in people's faces has tended to be a more successful route
than working within the system and making friends for marriage equality we
stopped asking politicians to help us and started demanding equality by hiring
High Price Lawyers and taking people States and whole countries to court for
being gay in the military we tried it the nice way and we got don't ass on tell
so then we started marching and had our gay millionaires threatened to stop
donating to democratic politicians if they didn't repeal the thing and when it
came to AIDS we did absolutely everything that every privileged person says
you're not supposed to do if you want people to like you because asking politely
got us ignored even those of us who knew Ronald Reagan but I digress the
Hallmark of an oppressor is to divorce a community from its own history it makes
it easier for controlling powers to dictate what that history was or simply lie
about a political body's involvement in systemic institutional and social
discrimination the diversity of relationships and experiences within the lgbtq
community should be shown not all gay men have the same experiences nor do all
lesbians bisexual people trans people or queer people in general and let's not
forget the representation of asexuals and A- Romantics who are often completely
overlooked in media the inclusion of diverse relationships and sexual Dynamics
is important whether it be runchy sex in a bath house or holding your high
school boyfriend's hand visibility in all forms of media including media
directed at younger people like heartstopper is incredibly important there's a
growing resistance to including queer characters in movies shows and books
directed at a ya or younger audience based on the misconception that their
presence inherently involves adult themes however children's media is an ideal
space to introduce the concept of diverse families and friendships teaching
acceptance and understanding at a young age finally we must recognize the queer
representation is not the end goal but part of a broader movement towards
inclusion and equality it's a means for storytelling that reflects the world as
it is in all its diversity and at its best it can influence perceptions and
Foster empathy it's not just about seeing oneself on screen it's about everyone
seeing the multifaceted World We Share learning from it and finding the
universal human experiences that connect us all your experiences are not erased
because Charlie and Nick can hold hands your trauma is not invalid because
Society doesn't recognize it you don't have to live up to the fairy tale that
Alex and Henry's story is told in no matter what you feel there is no wrong way
to be queer there are no rules saying if you didn't meet your boyfriend in high
school then you did things wrong you didn't miss out on your story maybe you're
just starting it and no matter what anyone says your story has a place in this
world so don't let anyone stop you from telling it this video was brought to you
by our amazing patrons like the ones you see on screen right now if you'd like
to help us keep making queer content on YouTube you can sign up for our patreon
at the link in the description thanks for watching I don't who's or right
youneed and I love it you bring on my to light I used to be Jed in my patience
some people who walked in and out of my life but you is so different this time
thoughts of the future of you caliz now you breaking Downs I've never found love
with no ego you stitching up my scars forever just the start yeah you we go know
go no no no no no go [Music] [Music] bre [Music] [Music] me together me and you
are [Music] breaking down my walls never found love with no e you stitching up
my scars forever just the start you no now you're breaking down my walls I've
never found love it no love love it no love [Music] [Music] it [Music] n n
-->